Cautious Greedy Strategy for Bearing-only Active
Localization: Analysis and Field Experiments ∗
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
Joshua Vander Hook, Pratap Tokekar, and Volkan Isler
Department of Computer Science, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455
e-mail: jvander@cs.umn.edu, tokekar@cs.umn.edu, isler@cs.umn.edu
Received 8 March 2013; accepted 18 November 2013
We study the problem of optimally choosing bearing measurement locations for localizing a stationary target
in minimum time. The targets are transmitting radio tags, and bearing measurements are acquired from radio
signal strength by a robot carrying a direction-sensitive radio antenna. Actively localizing radio tags has many
applications in surveillance, search and rescue, and environmental monitoring. Our work is motivated by the
task of monitoring radio-tagged invasive ﬁsh using autonomous vehicles. An active localization algorithm is
provided in order to locate a target up to the desired uncertainty . The time required to locate the target includes
time spent traveling as well as taking measurements. Since bearing measurements inferred from radio signals
have an inherent ambiguity associated with them, the proposed algorithm chooses measurements to minimize
the effect of ambiguous measurements on the target estimate. We present a closed-form bound on the time
required to locate a target using the presented active localization strategy . We also present the ﬁrst known lower
bound on the time required by any active localization algorithm (including the unknown optimal). Finally , we
bound the ratio of the upper and lower bounds, showing that the expected cost of our algorithm is within a
constant factor of the expected cost of the optimal solution. Robust initialization strategies that are motivated by
practical sensing limitations are also provided. Our algorithm is shown to reliably locate radio tags to a desired
uncertainty in simulations and multiple ﬁeld experiments. C⃝ 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
1. INTRODUCTION
In this paper, we study the problem of deploying a mobile
robot to locate a transmitting radio source. The robot may
take measurements of the bearing to the source, but each
measurement takes time and is assumed to be corrupted by
probabilistic noise. This problem is challenging because the
measurement locations must be computed without knowl-
edge of the true location of the source. In addition, radio-
source localization is particularly challenging because of
the unusual measurement model: depending on the en-
vironment, the radio signal strength indicator (RSSI) may
vary signiﬁcantly and be unreliable when used for range
information. Instead, a viable alternative is to use bear-
ing measurements obtained by rotating a direction-sensitive
antenna. For radially symmetric direction-sensitive anten-
nas, instead of returning the bearing toward the source (or
“target”), the returned result is a line that passes through
the target and sensor. These “ambiguous” measurements
further complicate the source-estimation problem (see
∗Preliminary versions of this work were presented at Vander Hook
et al. (2012a) and Vander Hook, Tokekar, and Isler (2012b). This
work combines the two results and presents improved theoretical
results and additional ﬁeld experiments.
Direct correspondence to: Joshua Vander Hook, e-mail:
jvander@cs.umn.edu
Figure 1). In Section 2, we discuss the bearing measure-
ment process and quantify our assumptions and measure-
ment models. This is followed by a brief discussion on
related work and preliminaries in Sections 3 and 4, respec-
tively . In Section 5, we show why radio signal strength mea-
surements often require complicated ﬁlters to estimate the
source. As a primary contribution, we then discuss how to
move the sensor after each measurement to deal with these
problems.
This work is motivated by locating stationary groups
of radio-tagged invasive ﬁsh using robots (Tokekar, Bran-
son, Vander Hook, & Isler, 2013). Locating transmitting ra-
dio sources has other applications, most notably search and
rescue using distress beacons. In these settings, it is often
desirable to locate the transmitting source as quickly as pos-
sible. In these settings, using an ofﬂine strategy that per-
forms a complete search of the environment can be pro-
hibitively expensive. Rather, an active localization algorithm,
which actively chooses measurement locations so as to bet-
ter localize the transmitting source, is desirable. Active lo-
calization is an online problem since the decision on where
to move must be made based on the available measure-
ments.
In this work, our primary contribution is both an on-
line algorithm to locate a radio source, and a cost analysis
of the algorithm that applies to any measurement sequence.
Journal of Field Robotics 31(2), 296–318 (2014) C⃝ 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
View this article online at wileyonlinelibrary.com • DOI: 10.1002/rob.21499
Vander Hook et al.: Cautious Greedy Strategy for Bearing-only Active Localization • 297
Figure 1. (a) Problem setup. A robot, without knowledge of the true target location x⋆ but with an initial hypothesis of the target
location, ˆx(0), must ﬁnd measurement locations to shrink the uncertainty about x⋆. Measurements taken far from x⋆, for example,
near ˆx(0), will ultimately provide little information about x⋆ and are thus wasteful. Shown is an example of a “double wedge”
or ambiguous measurement cone: From just one measurement, it is not clear if the target is near ˆ x(0) or x⋆. (b) The notation and
problem formulation. A sensor location at time i, denoted s(i), is described by ( r(i),α (i)). Here r(i) is the range from the sensor to
the current hypothesis, ˆx(i), and α(i) denotes the orientation with respect to the line formed by the major axis of the covariance
ellipse, /Sigma1(i), with eigenvalues σx (i)a n dσy (i) and orientation θ(i) with respect to a global frame.
In particular, we are able to bound the cost of executing
the algorithm even in the worst case, as well as provide an
expected-case analysis. To preserve generality , we include
system parameters such as the cost per measurement, cost
to relocate the robot, and sensor noise, making the closed-
form solution useful for many different systems or appli-
cation domains. We present the details of the algorithm in
Section 6.1. We further discuss a robust initialization proce-
dure in Section 6.2. The cost of our algorithm is derived in
Section 7.
To show the robustness of our algorithm to various
starting conditions, we provide a direct comparison of the
performance of our algorithm to that of the (unknown) op-
timal algorithm. We ﬁnd that the gap between the two is
small and bounded by a constant. We provide an analyti-
cal proof of this bound in Section 8. A novel result of our
analysis is a general lower bound on the cost of any active
localization algorithm that uses bearing sensors, presented
in Section 8.1.
Finally , the algorithm is experimentally validated in
simulation (Section 9) and using a mobile robot deployed
on frozen lakes in Minnesota, as shown in Section 10. We
present a series of ﬁeld deployments in which a mobile
rover can initialize a consistent hypothesis, and we choose
a small, bounded number of measurement locations to lo-
cate multiple radio tags with good accuracy , all with close
adherence to the theoretical results.
2. PROBLEM STATEMENT
Our problem setup is illustrated in Figure 1. We will esti-
mate the target’s position at time t as a two-dimensional
Gaussian distribution with mean ˆx(t) and covariance /Sigma1(t),
with eigenvalues σ2
x and σ2
y . Our objective is to deﬁne a
sequence of sensor positions S ={ s(1),s (2),...,s (N )} such
that the posterior covariance after incorporating all N mea-
surements is reduced below a threshold. That is,σx (N ) ≤ γ ·
σx (0),σ y (N ) ≤ γ · σy (0) with 0 <γ < 1. Our metric of sys-
tem cost is captured by the time required to execute the mea-
surement sequence S.L e tD(S) = ∑N− 1
i=0 ∥s(i + 1) − s(i)∥2 be
the distance traveled over the tour of the N measurement
locations. Note that the distance between measurements
may not be equal. The cost is the sum of the N measure-
ment times and D(S)
v , for robot velocity v. We will assume
for simplicity the robot travels with constant velocity and
can turn in a negligible amount of time. Let tm be the time
required to gather one bearing measurement. Then we state
our optimization problem as
minimize
S={s(1),...,s(N)} T (S) = N · tm + D(S)
v (1)
subject to
σx (N ) ≤ γ · σx (0),
σy (N ) ≤ γ · σy (0),
N ≥ 1.
For simplicity of notation, we will assume the robot has
unit velocity and drop the v term from the cost function.
This optimization problem is challenging for the following
reasons:
1. N is unknown. The objective function requires minimiz-
ing the size of the measurement sequence, as well as the
displacement between measurements. This is especially
crucial when the measurement time tm is non-negligible.
As we will see in the next section, previous literature
often assumes a ﬁxed N , corresponding to a ﬁxed time
horizon.
2. We wish to ﬁnd or approximate the global optimal so-
lution. A gradient-based search may ﬁnd a local mini-
mum that satisﬁes the constraints but cannot make any
Journal of Field Robotics DOI 10.1002/rob
298 • Journal of Field Robotics—2014
statements about convergence relative to global optimal-
ity . Asearch for the global optimal strategy is exponential
in N , and therefore infeasible.
3. We cannot assume a constant time interval between mea-
surements. In the next section, we show that this assump-
tion is commonly used but is not valid for the problem
of choosing discrete measurement locations.
4. Each bearing measurement is ambiguous. The bimodal
nature of the radio bearing measurements complicates
the ﬁltering process. In the worst case, an exponential
number of hypotheses must be maintained.
We now review the literature for approaches to solve
related problems.
3. RELATED WORK
In active localization, the objective is to decide where to take
measurements to maximize the performance of a given esti-
mator. Conversely , tracking and estimation literature takes
a passive approach: the task is to design an estimator that
is robust when given arbitrary measurements. In particular,
the problem of estimating a track for a maneuvering target
using bearing-only measurements has been well studied
(e.g., Li & Jilkov , 2001,2003,2005). However, designing an
estimator does not address the problem of choosing good
measurement locations. Thus, work on improved ﬁlter de-
sign would be orthogonal, but easily incorporated into our
active localization algorithm.
For estimating a target state with ambiguous bearing
measurements, Derenick, Fink, and Kumar (2011) consid-
ered radio-based measurements in the context of coop-
erative localization for teams of mobile robots. A multi-
hypothesis extended Kalman ﬁlter was used, and it was
shown that the robots’ motion could disambiguate the hy-
potheses. However, noactive motion strategy was provided.
Forney , Manii, Farris, Moline, and Lowe (2012) recently de-
signed a particle ﬁlter-based estimator for disambiguating
the sign of the bearing measurement toward a transmitting
tag embedded on leopard sharks. Similarly , active localiza-
tion was not considered.
Disregarding the discrete bearing measurement model,
several works exist in optimizing the robot trajectory while
assuming bearing measurements are obtained continuously
in time. Hoffmann and Tomlin (2010) explored such an ob-
jective, though their main contribution was a distributed
approximation for the mutual information between the sen-
sors and target, which is not applicable to this work, since a
single robot will visit all measurement locations. Martinez
and Bullo (2006) produced an algorithm to route bearing
sensors that were constrained to travel in predeﬁned geo-
metric areas but could not produce general strategies for
one or more robots. Frew (2009) provided a ﬁxed-horizon
optimization for the so-called Fixed Information, Minimum
Time problem. Frew (2003) provided an action-space search
over possible sensor trajectories to minimize the determi-
nant of the posterior covariance. A similar result was pro-
duced by Zhou and Roumeliotis (2011), who routed robots
to minimize the trace of the posterior covariance. In these
works, no global optimality conditions were explored and
no time bounds were given for the algorithms. Addition-
ally , we relax the constraint of ﬁxed travel time (or constant
distance) between measurements.
In Tokekar et al. (2013) and Tokekar, Vander Hook, and
Isler (2011), we investigated three algorithms to ﬁnd mea-
surement locations, each based on a search over the dis-
cretized space around the robot. Discretization and search
over state space was computationally demanding, and the
results were limited to a ﬁxed-sized displacement between
measurements because of the discretization size. Further-
more, there was no systematic approach for dealing with
the ambiguity of measurements.
Other results exist that use simpliﬁed noise models but
cannot be directly applied to real-world deployments. Re-
garding the ambiguous sensing model, the inﬁnite-line sen-
sor was considered by Bopardikar (2010), in the context of
pursuit-evasion games. A ﬁnite-time capture strategy was
provided by using pairs of measurements to resolve the
ambiguity . Sensor noise was not considered, making local-
ization of a static target trivial under the assumptions and
sensing model proposed. More recently , Borri, Bopardikar,
Hespanha, and Di Benedetto (2011) considered the problem
of locating a stationary target using a ﬁxed, small number
of stationary half-plane sensors deployed. The goal, simi-
lar to ours, was to minimize the number of sensor queries
and the length of the tour between them. However, the tar-
get was restricted to a discrete set of locations, and sensor
positions were known ap r i o r i, resulting in a divide-and-
search strategy that does not generalize to our setting. In
this work, we use noise models calibrated from real-world
data and conﬁrm our ﬁndings with ﬁeld deployments. We
also require no discrete constraints on the environment
or target location to solve a more general version of the
problem.
Similar to ambiguous bearing measurements, range-
only measurements can lead to multiple hypotheses about
the target location. Merino, Caballero, and Ollero (2010)
studied the problem of active localization using range-only
measurements from radio sensors. They represent multiple
hypotheses with a Gaussian mixture model (GMM). The
robot’s direction is greedily chosen from a discretized set
that maximizes the change in the entropy of the GMM.
Zhou and Roumeliotis (2008) studied the problem of track-
ing a single moving target with multiple robots measuring
the range to the target. They show that the problem of de-
termining the sensing locations for all robots minimizing
the trace of the target’s posterior covariance for the next
time step is NP-Hard, and they present two heuristics to
solve the problem. Morbidi and Mariottini (2012) studied
the single and multitarget active tracking problem with a
Journal of Field Robotics DOI 10.1002/rob
Vander Hook et al.: Cautious Greedy Strategy for Bearing-only Active Localization • 299
team of robots with 3D range sensors. The authors present a
gradient-based controller for controlling the team of robots
to (locally) minimize the uncertainty in estimating the tar-
get’s location. Scerri, Glinton, Owens, Scerri, and Sycara
(2007) used radio signal strength to estimate the range to
radio sources and a grid-based Bayesian ﬁlter to estimate
the location of each radio source. A path-search algorithm
based on Rapidly Exploring Random Trees was proposed
but lacked any theoretical guarantees. Due to the differences
in sensing model, these results for range-only sensors can-
not be directly applied for bearing sensors. Furthermore,
unlike these works, we consider the case in which each
measurement takes nonzero time and the objective is to
minimize the travel and measurement time to localize the
target to a desired uncertainty bound.
We also present a bound on the optimal bearings-only
localization algorithm. Previous results in this direction in-
clude Hammel, Liu, Hilliard, & Gong, 1989, who numeri-
cally calculated an optimal trajectory using the determinant
of the Fischer information matrix (FIM) evaluated at the true
target location. In this work, no closed-form solution was
provided, and the bounds presented in this paper general-
ize the result by optimizing the number and spacing of the
measurements. Bishop and Pathirana (2008) directly evalu-
ated the determinant of the FIM to ﬁnd sufﬁcient conditions
for an optimal placement of sensors, whereas we solve for
the placement uniquely and minimize the cost of traveling
between sensor locations.
In our previous work, we deﬁned a search algorithm
that guaranteed that the robot would ﬁnd a position from
which it can detect a tagged ﬁsh in predeﬁned regions of the
lake (Tokekar et al., 2013). Song, Member, Kim, and Yi (2011)
and Song, Kim, and Yi (2012) considered a similar problem
of searching for and localizing multiple radio sources. The
objective was to ﬁnd a location that corresponds to the max-
imum signal strength of the transmitting source. A “Ridge
Walking Algorithm” was proposed to repeatedly traverse
the area around each radio source, making the ﬁnal uncer-
tainty a function of the signal strength. The main results
apply to radio sources that are infrequently transmitting,
and so the time-to-locate a source is an unbounded ran-
dom variable. These works are complementary , since we
assume the robot begins in detection range and use bear-
ing measurements to reduce the uncertainty . Furthermore,
we allow the ﬁnal required precision to be speciﬁed and
provide explicit, absolute bounds on localization time.
A greedy algorithm is presented in this work that pro-
vides the next measurement location in closed form, remov-
ing the need for any state-space search. It is shown how to
select measurement locations to limit the effect of ambiguity
and bound the time spent by the robot during the localiza-
tion, while providing a guarantee of posterior covariance.
Finally , we show that no other bearing-based algorithm can
perform signiﬁcantly better than ours by providing a lower
bound on the optimal cost directly .
4. PRELIMINARIES
In this section, we brieﬂy review the necessary background
and deﬁne our notation. We have had success in ﬁeld ex-
periments using the extended Kalman ﬁlter (EKF) for this
application, and hence base our algorithm with respect to
this common ﬁltering technique. The closed-form represen-
tation for the EKF allows us to make guarantees about al-
gorithm execution time and completeness as elaborated in
the next sections. We leave the generalization to other tech-
niques to future work, but we provide a direct comparison
in Section 9.
Consider Figure 1(b). We begin with the robot at lo-
cation Gs(0), according to a global coordinate frame {G}.
The true target location, Gx⋆, is unknown, but we may take
bearing measurements from any location, s(i), of the form
z(i) = h
(Gx⋆,G s(i)
)
= tan− 1
(Gsy (i)−Gx⋆y
Gsx (i)−Gx⋆x
)
. However, the bear-
ing is actually the orientation of a line that passes through
the sensor and target. Since it is not clear if the measured
bearing points toward or away from the target, we call it an
ambiguous measurement.
A sequence of measurements is denoted S =
{s(1),...,s (N )}. We assume an initial two-dimensional
Gaussian hypothesis in a world frame {G}, with mean G ˆx
and covariance /Sigma1(i)[ i . e . ,x⋆ ∼ N (G ˆx(i),/Sigma1(i))]. For conve-
nience of analysis and notation, we will describe sensor
locations in polar coordinates with respect to the target hy-
pothesis, i.e., s(i) = (α(i),r (i)). The local frame about ˆ x is
oriented with respect to the covariance ellipse, with the x
axis corresponding to the major axis (eigenvector with the
larger eigenvalue) at each time step. We denote a series of
sensor locations as S ={ s(1),...,s (N )}, with measurements
Z ={ z(1),...,z (N )}.
We employ an EKF to merge the measurements ac-
quired. The EKF requires that the measurement noise is
Gaussian. The equations that describe the EKF updates are
(Bar-Shalom, Li, & Kirubarajan, 2001)
ˆx(i + 1) = ˆx(i) + Kiy(i), (2)
/Sigma1(i + 1) = /Sigma1(i) − /Sigma1(i)
(
HT
i S− 1
i Hi
)
/Sigma1(i), (3)
with
Hi =∇ ˆx(i)h(ˆx(i),s (i)) = 1
r(i) [ − sin α(i)c o sα(i) ], (4)
Si = Hi/Sigma1(i)HT
i + σ2
s , (5)
Ki = /Sigma1i− 1HT
i S− 1
i ,
yi = zi − h(ˆx(i),s (i)).
As noted by Thrun et al. (2005), the covariance update
step from the EKF [Eq. (3)] can be rearranged to a more
convenient form, known as the extended information ﬁlter.
Journal of Field Robotics DOI 10.1002/rob
300 • Journal of Field Robotics—2014
Figure 2. (a) Ambiguous measurements produce two possible bearings ( z and z′). (b) The EKF approximates the measurement
probability as a Gaussian with mean zero and variance Si . (c) The PDF of the target hypothesis after updating the Gaussian shown
in (a) with measurements z′ and z.
= /Sigma1− 1(i) + 1
r2σ2
s
[
sin2 α(i) − sin α(i) · cos α(i)
− sin α(i) · cos α(i)c o s 2 α(i)
]
.
(6)
Equation (6) follows because of the form of h(·) for bearing-
only tracking. For bearings constructed with a directional
radio antenna, a double-wedge sensing model is used. A
signiﬁcant consequence of this sensing model is the am-
biguity regarding which side of the robot the measure-
ment originated from. So, before applying the EKF update
equations, we must resolve this ambiguity as discussed
next.
5. ADDRESSING AMBIGUITY
In this section, we show how to structure a measurement se-
quence to minimize the impact of ambiguous bearing mea-
surements. To see the effect of ambiguous measurements,
consider the situation shown in Figure 2. In Figure 2(a), a
mobile robot arrives at position s(i) and takes a measure-
ment, as shown by the line z–s(i)–z′. Notice that the line
can be separated into two rays, which we deﬁne as s(i)–
z and s(i)–z′ with the angles 0 ≤| z| < |z′|≤ π. Note that
z′ = z + π,a n d z is the “forward-facing” part of the mea-
surement, or the part of the line segment that passes closer
to the point ˆx(i). Both rays represent a deviation from the
expected measurement [the line s(i)– ˆx(i), corresponding to
angle 0]. After performing a Bayesian update of the target
hypothesis using the ambiguous measurement, the target
probability density function (PDF) will also be bimodal, as
shown in Figure 2(c).
Analytically , we can see this as follows. Let p[ˆx(i + 1)]
represent the posterior PDF of the target,Z ={ z}∪{ z′} be an
ambiguous measurement that we decompose as described
into two rays, s(i) be the sensor location, and x(i) the prior
hypothesis,
p(x(i + 1)|x(i),s (i),Z )
∝ p(x(i + 1)|x(i),s (i),z ) · p(z|x(i),s (i))
+ p(x(i + 1)|x(i),s (i),z ′) · p(z′|x(i),s (i)). (7)
This PDF is well approximated by a mixture of two Gaus-
sians, one for each peak in the PDF given the new mea-
surement [see Figure 2(c)]. A reasonable practice is to use
two Gaussian hypotheses, weighted as shown. However,
splitting the PDF with each measurement will lead to an
exponential number of hypotheses over multiple measure-
ments. To address this problem, it is common to discard or
combine hypotheses with low relative weights (see Black-
man, 2004; Cox & Hingorani, 1996; Reid, 1979). However, if
the robot takes a measurement from a location very close to
the peak of the prior hypothesis, the weights p(z|x(i),s (i))
and p(z′|x(i),s (i)) may be equal and no hypothesis can be
discarded.
The key observation that motivates our choice of
measurement locations is the following: The likelihood
p(z′|x(i),s (i)) is highly dependent on the sensor location
relative to the target hypothesis. As we will show below,
one can always choose measurement locations such that
p(z|x(i),s (i)) is much higher than p(z′|x(i),s (i)). In this way ,
only one Gaussian hypothesis will have a high weight after
each measurement.
Speciﬁcally , we choose measurement locations such
that p(z′|x(i)) ≪ p(z|x(i)) for any value of z. This is chal-
lenging because the measurement value ( z) is only given as
the approximate distributionp(z|x(i)). To proceed, letβ be a
parameter describing the maximum acceptable probability
that the target is in fact “behind” the sensor (correspond-
ing to z′ being the correct bearing). We can choose locations
such that p(z′|x(i)) is always less than β using the following
lemma (a proof of which is delayed until Appendix 1).
Lemma 1. Let /Phi1(a) be the Gaussian Cumulative Distribution
such that/Phi1(a) = p(x ≤ a) when x ∼ N (0, 1). Deﬁne a threshold
parameter β and true measurementz⋆. Deﬁne sensing locations in
radial coordinates (α(i),r (i)) centered around the current target
Journal of Field Robotics DOI 10.1002/rob
Vander Hook et al.: Cautious Greedy Strategy for Bearing-only Active Localization • 301
hypothesis. Then any sensing location satisfying
r(i) ≥
√
σ2
x (i)s i n2 α(i) + σ2
y (i)c o s2 α(i)
σ2
β − σ2
s
with constant: σβ = π
2 · /Phi1− 1 (
1 − β
2
) (8)
will also satisfy p(z′|x(i),s (i)) ≤ β.
Lemma 1 deﬁnes an “ellipse of closest approach” around
the target hypothesis, with principal axes deﬁned as a func-
tion of the uncertainty in the estimate. Effectively , we have
deﬁned a strategy that truncates part of the PDF by discard-
ing the possibility that the target is behind the sensor. The
amount of discarded probability mass is approximated by
the β parameter. As β → 0, none of the PDF is truncated,
but the measurement locations become inﬁnitely far away .
Perhaps intuitively , in the following sections we show that
the parameter β captures the tradeoff between time spent
localizing a target and the accuracy of the ﬁnal estimate. In
particular, the time required to locate a target will follow
directly in closed form in Section 7 as a function of β.I n
the rest of the paper, we formalize this intuition. First, we
specify our algorithm.
6. THE β-CAUTIOUS ALGORITHM
Algorithm 1: β-CautiousStrategy (s0, ˆx0,/Sigma10,β,γ,σ 2
s )
1: σβ ← π
2·/Phi1− 1 (1− β
2 )
2: σ2
x (0),σ 2
y (0) ← eigenvalues(/Sigma10)
3: i ← 1
4: while σx (i) ≥ γ · σx (0) or σy (i) ≥ γ · σy (i) do
5: Polar frame at ˆ x(i − 1) aligned with σx (i − 1)
6: r(i) ← σx (i− 1)√
σ2
β−σ2s
7: Let s(i) be the closer of ( r(i), π
2 )o r( −r(i), π
2 ).
8: Collect measurement z(i)f r o ms(i)
9: ˆ x(i),/Sigma1(i) ← ekf_update (z(i),σs, ˆx(i − 1),/Sigma1i− 1)
10: σ2
x (i),σ 2
y (i) ← eigenvalues [/Sigma1(i)]
11: i ← i + 1
12: end while
We now introduce our main algorithm. In essence, we
present a greedy algorithm that outputs a measurement lo-
cation based on the current hypothesis. At each time step,
it will output a measurement location that can minimize
the maximum eigenvalue of the covariance matrix. Such
an algorithm is often called E-Optimal in the literature
(Pukelsheim, 2006).
6.1. Algorithm Description
Each measurement location is subject to the constraint given
in Lemma 1. Speciﬁcally , ﬁxα = π
2 with respect to the larger
eigenvalue/eigenvector pair at every time step ( σx in this
notation). Thus, Eq. (8) simpliﬁes to
r ≥ σx
√
σ2
β − σ2
s
. (9)
As σx → 0, r strictly decreases, and thus the range (relative
to the hypothesis) between measurements decreases as well.
Since the algorithm produces measurement locations that
begin far away from the hypothesis (as a function of β)
and only approach when the variance decreases, we call the
algorithm β-Cautious.
Algorithm 1 presents the detailed implementation of
our algorithm. At each time step, the robot moves to a
position perpendicular to the eigenvector with the largest
eigenvalue. The robot chooses the smallest range satisfying
Eq. (9). Figure 3 shows a pair of measurements and the path
of the robot. In general, there are two such locations, so it is
easiest to choose the closer of the two. This process repeats
until both eigenvalues are below the desired threshold.
Figure 4 shows a full simulated execution of the algorithm.
As the uncertainty ( σx ) decreases, the measurement loca-
tions are chosen closer to the hypothesis [see Eq. (9)].
Since the algorithm reduces the largest eigenvalue at
every measurement step, it is guaranteed to satisfy the con-
straint/Sigma1(N ) ≤ γ · /Sigma1(0) in ﬁnite time. We use the EKF update
routine [Eqs. (2) and (3)] as a subroutine. Since all operations
are available in closed form, and the size of the covariance is
small and ﬁxed, Algorithm 1 has a constant computational
complexity . While a greedy , multitarget extension is possi-
ble, we focus on the analysis of the single-target algorithm
in this work.
6.2. Initialization of Prior Estimates
So far, we have assumed that an initial estimate
N (ˆx(0),/Sigma1(0)) is available. However, during a search opera-
tion on a frozen lake, such an initial estimate is not usually
available. Commonly , the robot follows a predeﬁned search
path [see Tokekar et al. (2013) for more details] until it moves
into sensing range of a target. To proceed with bearing-only
localization, we must construct an initial estimate of the
target location.
This initialization problem was challenging because the
sensing ranges of individual radio tags may vary based on
the depth of the tag, the age of the tag, and other environ-
mental factors, and hence the signal strength cannot directly
be used. A straightforward technique might be to use a small
number of bearing measurements to initialize the prior es-
timate. This is undesirable for RSSI-based bearings because
of the signiﬁcant time required, the high sensor noise, and
the ambiguity .
Instead, for completeness we present the relevant de-
tails of a bounded-time strategy that forms a consistent ini-
tial estimate by exploiting the limited sensing range of the
sensor. We assume that each tag has an isotropic sensing
Journal of Field Robotics DOI 10.1002/rob
302 • Journal of Field Robotics—2014
Figure 3. One measurement step of the cautious strategy presented in Algorithm 1. Shown is a covariance ellipse and target
hypothesis (circle) along with the true target location (star). (a) The robot moves to a location perpendicular to the direction of
highest uncertainty . (b) A bearing measurement is collected, and the hypothesis is updated. The “backward facing” cone (dashed
lines) is discarded. (c) The now-reshaped covariance ellipse has a new direction of highest uncertainty , and the process repeats.
Figure 4. A simulated execution of the cautious strategy . This ﬁgure is best viewed in color. (a) The full run. (b) Detail of the boxed
region in the ﬁrst ﬁgure. A red ellipse denotes the ﬁnal target covariance, the black circle is the desired uncertainty , blue is the prior
estimate, and green is the robot path and measurement locations. The robot travels in a roughly zigzag path toward the target,
while the target hypothesis shifts rectilinearly toward the true target.
range, and so the detected tag X is at the center of a sensing
circle CX of radius r.T h ec i r c l eCX is used to initialize the
three-sigma bounds of a Gaussian prior estimate. In prac-
tice, we do not expect the sensing area to be circular. The
circle is only used as a conservative prior estimate and in-
put into the localization algorithm discussed in the previous
section.
Note that bothX (the origin ofCx )a n dr are initially un-
known. Our objective is to estimate both of these quantities.
By ﬁnding three points (or more) on the perimeter ofCX ,w e
can solve for X and r. To ﬁnd these points, the local search
proceeds as follows. First, from the point of ﬁrst detection
(O), the robot moves in a ﬁxed direction with respect to the
global frame (e.g., North or angle α). Then, when the robot
can no longer detect the target X (position A in Figure 5) it
reverses direction and returns to O. The line segment tra-
versed in these two steps is referred to as a search path. A full
execution of four search paths is shown in Figure 5. We then
ﬁt a circle to these four points, which estimates the sensing
circle CX . The localization strategy requires a 2D Gaussian
distribution, which we construct as follows: We use the cen-
ter of the circle as the mean of the distribution [ ˆ x(0)], and
the radius of the circle as the 3- σ of the covariance in both
the x and y directions.
We can establish the cost as follows (refer to
Figure 5). Let angle AOX be θ. By design, the angle AOB
is π
2 .T h ed i s t a n c e|AB| is 2r and segment OA has length
2r cos θ while OB has length 2 r sin θ. Each of the four
search paths ( OA,..., OD) must be covered twice. With
velocity v,
Tinit = 4r
v cos θ+ 4r
v sin θ+ 4 · ϵ, (10)
Journal of Field Robotics DOI 10.1002/rob
Vander Hook et al.: Cautious Greedy Strategy for Bearing-only Active Localization • 303
Figure 5. Search-based initialization. (a) The robot continues along an arbitrary but ﬁxed direction until it cannot detect the signal
from X (at position A). The robot then returns to O and repeats the same strategy along a perpendicular line ( B). In general, the O
can lie in the interior of the sensing circle, hence the robot also searches along C and D. (b) A second search from the center of the
ﬁrst circle will reveal all nearby tags, provided the sensing range is larger than the spacing between targets.
where ϵ is the time taken to recognize that the robot has
left CX , turned around, and reentered CX . Note that θis un-
known and can take any value between 0 and 2π, depending
on the relative orientation of the target position with respect
to the ﬁrst search direction. To obtain the worst-case cost, we
maximize the cost function with respect to θ. A straightfor-
ward derivation shows the cost is maximum when θ= 45◦
for a maximum cost of
max
θ
Tinit = 2
5
2
r
v + 4 · ϵ. (11)
The expected search time, assuming θ is uniform in the
range [0 , 2π], is E [Tinit] = 2r
v + 4ϵ. The sensing range of
the antennas in our system is typically less than 100 m.
Hence, the time taken by the described initialization proce-
dure is no more than taking four bearing measurements per
tag. Furthermore, a strategy that relies on a small num-
ber of bearing measurements for initialization may lead
to an inconsistent estimate if the (small number of) ini-
tial bearing measurements contain signiﬁcant noise. Ad-
ditionally , our search-based initialization becomes even
more cost-effective as the number of nearby tags (with
overlapping sensing circles) increases (Vander Hook et al.,
2012a).
7. BOUNDING THE COST OF THE β-CAUTIOUS
ALGORITHM
To bound the time required to execute the algorithm on
a real system, we ﬁrst consider the number of measure-
ments required to achieve the requested covariance reduc-
tion. We begin by showing that a β-Cautious measurement
sequence decreases covariance (increases information) by
a constant factor at each time step. From this there fol-
lows a bound on the number of measurements required
to reach the desired covariance in Lemma 3. Because the
measurement values are unknown (random) variables, the
state of the target is unknown for each time step. There-
fore, it is necessary to ﬁnd a worst-case change in hy-
pothesis location for each measurement, and bound the
time required to shift the measurement location to com-
pensate. The results derived here are conﬁrmed in simu-
lations (see Section 9) and ﬁeld experiments (Section 10).
The proofs, which are omitted for brevity , are included in
Appendixes B–E.
We begin by deriving the exact covariance reduction
from a β-Cautious measurement strategy .
Lemma 2. If a pair of measurements is taken fromα(i) = π
2 with
range constraint (from Lemma 1) r(i) = σx (i)√
σ2
β−σ2s
, the variance in
both the x and y directions is decreased by a constant factor,
σ2
x (i + 2) =
σ2
β
σ2
s
σ2
x (i) with σβ >σs (see Lemma 1). (12)
In addition, the alignment of the major and minor axes of the
posterior covariance does not rotate from the prior.
The above lemma guarantees that after each pair of mea-
surements, the covariance decreases by a factor of
σ2
β
σ2s
.A
straightforward derivation shows an upper bound on the
number of measurements required to reduce the eigenval-
ues of the covariance by a factor of γ to achieve the desired
bounds.
Lemma 3. Let the time-stamped range for each measurement
be r(i), and the corresponding maximum variance be σ2
x (i)
[covariance /Sigma1(i)], at time-step i. While constraining the range
Journal of Field Robotics DOI 10.1002/rob
304 • Journal of Field Robotics—2014
Figure 6. The measurement sequenceS ={ s0 ...s 4}. (a) The target hypothesis shifts vertically because of the measurement received
at s1. (b) The next measurement location ( s2) must be shifted by the same amount to satisfy the range constraint.
as deﬁned in Lemma 1, such that r ≥ σx√
σ2
β−σ2s
, the number
of measurements required to satisfy the uncertainty objective,
σx (N ) ≤ γ · σx (0) with 0 <γ ≤ 1,i s
N = 4 log(
σ2
β
σ2s
)
( 1
γ
)
.
Using the number of measurements for a problem in-
stance, it is possible to estimate the distance traveled over a
tour of the measurement locations. Note that the measure-
ment locations are speciﬁed as (r(i),α (i)) pairs with respect
to ˆx(i), the hypothesis at each time-step. An example of a
measurement sequence with N = 4 is shown in Figure 10.
Because the hypothesis may move after new measurements,
it is not trivial to solve for the distance traveled. The general
form of the distance traveled is
D(Salg) ≤
N− 1∑
i=1
∥s(i + 1) − s(i)∥+∥ ˆx(i + 1) − ˆx(i)∥.
The ﬁrst quantity is the total distance traveled by the robotin
the target’s frameﬁxed at each step [Figure 10(a)]. The second
quantity is the shift between the hypothesis, i.e., the shift
in the target’s local frame after each measurement [Figure
10(b)]. Both quantities admit upper bound, as follows.
Since the covariance does not rotate, in the local frame
of the target hypothesis the measurement sequence simply
alternates between both principal axes [as shown in Figure
10(a)]. Each measurement takes place at a ﬁxed range,r(i) =
σ(i)√
σ2
β−σ2s
, in the corresponding local frame. Intuitively , this
allows an upper bound on the worst-case travel distance of
the robot in the local frame in terms of the covariance at
each step.
Lemma 4. The total displacement between sensor locations in
the local frame of the hypothesis (i.e., disregarding hypothesis
displacement) satisﬁes
N− 1∑
i=1
∥s(i + 1) − s(i)∥≤
N− 1∑
i=1
√
2√
σ2
β − σ2
s
σx (i).
Using the EKF update equations, we can compute the
maximum displacement between the target hypothesis for
any measurement that can be obtained in terms of the co-
variance at that step [Figure 10(b)]. This allows us to bound
the total shift in the local frame centered at the hypothesis
at each measurement step.
Lemma 5. The total shift in the target hypothesis from a mea-
surement sequence of size N is bounded above as
N− 1∑
i=1
∥ ˆx(i + 1) − ˆx(i)∥≤
N− 1∑
i=1
σx (i)
π
√
σ2
β − σ2
s
σ2
β
.
We add the target displacement at each step to the dis-
tance traveled between each measurement, which preserves
the upper bound by the triangle inequality [cf. Figure 6(b)].
The above three lemmas together give a bound on the num-
ber of measurements and distance traveled by the robot. We
can now fully bound the time required to localize a target.
Theorem 1. The total time taken by the β-Cautious strategy is
given as
T (Sβ) ≤ σx (0) ·
⎛
⎝
√
2√
σ2
β − σ2
s
+
π
√
σ2
β − σ2
s
σ2
β
⎞
⎠ ·
[
1 − √ γ
1 − σs
σβ
]
+ 4tm log(
σ2
β
σ2s
)
( 1
γ
)
+ D(s0,s 1). (13)
Proof: The time spent localizing a target consists of travel
time and measurement time. The time spent measuring is
simply N · tm,w h e r eN follows from Lemma 3. To bound
Journal of Field Robotics DOI 10.1002/rob
Vander Hook et al.: Cautious Greedy Strategy for Bearing-only Active Localization • 305
the time spent traveling, we use the distance bounds from
Lemmas 4 and 5. Note that we have assumed unit velocity;
otherwise, the following must be scaled by the velocity of
the robot:
D(Salg) ≤
N− 1∑
i=1
σx (i)
√
2√
σ2
β − σ2
s
+
N− 1∑
i=1
σx (i)
π
√
σ2
β − σ2
s
σ2
β
.
Note that the two series can be combined. Factoring out and
grouping all constants yields
D(Salg) ≤
⎛
⎝
√
2√
σ2
β − σ2
s
+
π
√
σ2
β − σ2
s
σ2
β
⎞
⎠ .
N− 1∑
i=1
σx (i).
To proceed, note that σx (i) =
(
σs
σβ
)i
σx (0) [see Eq. (12)]. Then
the summation on the right is a geometric series, with the
following solution:
σx (0) ·
[ N− 1∑
i=1
( σs
σβ
)i ]
≤ σx (0) ·
[ N∑
i=1
( σs
σβ
)i ]
= σx (0) ·
[
1 − √ γ
1 − σs
σβ
]
.
The desired result follows. Note that we have added
D(s0,s 1), the time to travel between the initial sensor lo-
cation and the ﬁrst measurement location. □
From here we would like to point out some intuitive
results of this upper bound. First, as γ → 1, the algorithm
requires no time to execute. This is because the difference
between the ﬁnal (requested) covariance and the initial co-
variance becomes small. Essentially , this shows the adaptiv-
ity of the algorithm: A good initial estimate or less restrictive
desired uncertainty will lower execution time.
Notice also that as σs
σβ
→ 1, the work required ap-
proaches inﬁnity . Intuitively , constraining the variance, with
caution, to a value comparable to the noise in the sensor re-
sults in measurements taken from very distant locations [see
Eq. (9)], which provide small information gains [see Eq. (6)].
The effect of σβ as a function of β is further explored using
simulations studies in Section 9.
8. BOUNDS ON THE OPTIMAL COST
The previous section established an upper bound on the
worst-case cost of using the β-Cautious strategy to locate a
stationary target. In this section, we establish lower bounds
on the cost of the optimal measurement sequence. Using
these bounds, we then show that no other algorithm can
localize a stationary target signiﬁcantly faster, as a function
of the system parameters and desired ﬁnal uncertainty .
In the following section, we present a general lower
bound on the cost of any bearing-only active localization
sequence, even one that does not suffer from ambiguous
measurements. We compare this to the cost of the proposed
algorithm in Section 8.2. Beginning in Section 8.3, we con-
sider the worst-case execution time for the proposed algo-
rithm, compared to that of any other online algorithm. We
specify both costs as a function of the same true target lo-
cation and hypothesis. This allows a direct comparison of
both algorithms against a common, uncontrollable adver-
sary (e.g., Nature) in Section 8.4.
8.1. Lower Bound for an Ofﬂine Algorithm
We begin by deriving a lower bound on the time required to
execute the optimal measurement sequence that is planned
ofﬂine—in other words, with respect to the true target loca-
tion. This lower bound is a function of the system param-
eters, and therefore is general and applies to any mobile
bearing sensor and any reasonable method of fusing the
measurements. This result is presented in Theorem 2.
Our proof makes use of the Cramer-Rao lower bound
(CRLB, or C) [Van Trees (1971)] as follows. Continue to as-
sume the measurements are distributed around the true
target without bias, given the probability density function
Z ∼ f (S; x). C(S, x) is deﬁned as the inverse of the Fisher
information matrix (FIM, or F) and gives the minimum co-
variance about a random vector x given a series of observa-
tions S.T h eF I Mh a se a c h(i, j) element given with respect
to the ith element of x as follows:
F(i, j) = E
[ ∂
∂x(i) ln [f (S; x)] ∂
∂x(j ) ln [f (S; x)]
]
. (14)
The matrix F tells us several important things. First,
if F is rank-deﬁcient, then no efﬁcient estimator exists with
ﬁnite variance for the given observation sequence and tar-
get x. That is, it is impossible to achieve the objective,
/Sigma1N ⪯ γ2 · /Sigma10.S e c o n d ,F contains all the information about
the sensor locations and true target location. Thus, for
a possible location ˆx, the information gain is as follows:
f (S, x)∼ N (h(x,s (i)),S (i)) and so ∂
∂x(i) ln f (S; x) = Hi [see
Eq. (4)]. Then F reduces to [which is of the same form as
Eq. (6)]
F(S) =
N∑
i=1
1
σs
HT H. (15)
We can now explore the structure of the CRLB for an
optimal measurement sequence. Let an optimal trajectory be
denoted S ={ s(0),s (1),...s (k)} with cost T (S) as follows:
T (S) = k · tm + D(S)
= k · tm +
k∑
i=1
∥s(i) − s(i − 1)∥2.
We make no assumptions about the algorithm used to
localize the target, other than a nonzero time requirement
for each measurement. Notice in this case the number of
Journal of Field Robotics DOI 10.1002/rob
306 • Journal of Field Robotics—2014
Figure 7. An illustration of the sequence S′. An arbitrary tra-
jectory (left) is lower-bounded by a well-structured trajectory
S′ (right), according to Lemmas 6 through 7.
measurements k, and the corresponding measurement lo-
cations are both unknown. Also, note that the optimal algo-
rithm must be a function of the measurement cost. At one
extreme, tm → 0, the total cost to localize a target is domi-
nated by travel time, and the optimal strategy will not travel
far and will take many measurements. At the other extreme
for high tm, the optimal strategy can afford to pay for large
displacements to gain a minimal number of maximally in-
formative measurements.
By constraining the ﬁnal covariance and treating the
prior covariance /Sigma1(0) as an “observation” of the target
state, the information gain from the sequence of measure-
ments described by S is given by Eq. (15) as /Sigma1(k)− 1 =
F(S) + /Sigma1(0)− 1. Taking the trace of this equation provides
the following relationship, where each α(i)a n dr(i)o f S are
unknown:
1
σ2
x (k) + 1
σ2
y (k) = 1
σ2
x (0) + 1
σ2
y (0)
+
k∑
i=1
1
r2(i)σ2
s
[sin2 α(i) + cos2 α(i)]. (16)
The trace shows the net information gain about both
eigenvalues. By applying the net measurement gain directly
to one eigenvalue, we can lower-bound the amount of work
required to reduce both eigenvalues. The previous relation-
ship becomes
1
σ2
x (k) = 1
σ2
x (0) +
k∑
i=1
1
r2(i)σ2
s
. (17)
Note this is equivalent to setting eachα(i)t o π
2 as shown
in Figure 7 (left). The resulting straight-line trajectory is
labeled S′. Now we can explore the structure given by S′.
The next lemma shows that S′ can be structured such
that all measurements are taken from the same location
without decreasing the information gain given by Eq. (17).
Lemma 6. The sequence S′ takes all measurements from one
location.
Proof: To ﬁnd a contradiction, assume that S′ contains
measurements from more than one location from various
ranges given as r(i). Let rmin be the minimum of all these
ranges. The information gain [Eq. (17)] will be 1
r2 (i) ≤ 1
r2min
.
Since the sequence already pays to travel to rmin, the closest
position, we could move all measurements to the closest
location (at rmin) without incurring extra cost but gaining
extra information. This contradicts the assumption that S′
is optimal. □
Lemma 7. Assume the sequence S′ takes k⋆ measurements. Then
the optimal range fromx⋆ for taking all measurements is given by
ropt =
√
k⋆ · σx (0)
σs
√
γ2
1 − γ2
incurring a total time cost of
T (S′) = k⋆ · tm + r⋆ −
√
k · σx (0)
σs
√
γ2
1 − γ2 , (18)
where r⋆ is the distance from the starting robot location to x⋆.
Proof: Returning to Eq. (17), it is clear that all r(i)a r ee q u a l
from Lemma 7. Since the trajectory S satisﬁes the objective
of reducing uncertainty ,σ2
x (k) is upper-bounded by γ2σ2
x (0).
Substituting this inequality into Eq. (17) produces the fol-
lowing relationship:
r(k) =
√
k σx (0)
σs
√
1 − γ2
γ2 . (19)
By assuming k = k⋆, the result follows. □
The result of the previous lemmas is the trajectory
shown in Figure 7 (right). Notice that the range ropt is pro-
portional to the square root of the number of measurements
taken. Since k ≥ 1, it is tempting to simply lower-bound
the time requirement by substituting k = 1i n t oE q .( 1 8 ) .
However, this would unfairly restrict the optimal strategy
to travel to a position from which a single measurement
would be sufﬁcient. Instead, we must ﬁnd the tradeoff be-
tween ropt and k as a function of the system parameters,
tm, γ,a n d σx (0), which determine the optimal number of
measurements.
Theorem 2. Let S⋆
OFF be the optimal ofﬂine, bearing-only (not-
necessarily-ambiguous) measurement sequence. If S⋆
OFF requires
T (S⋆
OFF ) time to reduce σx and σy by the constant γ,w h e n
centered at the true target location, then T (S′) is a lower bound
on T (S⋆
OFF ) as follows:
T (S⋆
OFF ) ≥ T (S′) = max
[
r⋆ − σ2(0)
2 · tmσ2
s
( γ2
1 − γ2
)
, 0
]
+ tm.
Proof: Notice that Eq. (18) is a function of k, the un-
known number of measurements, and the known problem
Journal of Field Robotics DOI 10.1002/rob
Vander Hook et al.: Cautious Greedy Strategy for Bearing-only Active Localization • 307
parameters, γ, σx (0), and σs .L e tσ2
0 be the larger of the two
eigenvalues of /Sigma1(0). We can minimize the cost with respect
to k. Taking the derivative of Eq. (18) and setting it equal to
zero yields
k = σ2(0)
4t2
mσ2
s
( γ2
1 − γ2
)
. (20)
Substituting this results in a distance traveled of
D(S′) = r⋆ − σ2(0)
2 · tmσ2
s
( γ2
1 − γ2
)
.
Now observe that in general the starting range to the true
target may be less than r⋆, requiring no movement. Then
from the optimal location, take k ≥ 1 measurements to ﬁnd
the desired result. □
The closed-form expression for k in Eq. (20) follows
intuition: As the prior uncertainty [ σ(0)2]i n c r e a s e s ,m o r e
measurements are required. As the measurement time tm
increases, the optimal strategy reduces k (and subsequently
moves closer). As the sensor noise σs increases, the optimal
strategy takes fewer measurements from closer positions.
Based on this lower bound, we compare the cost of our pro-
posed algorithm with that of an optimal ofﬂine algorithm.
8.2. Comparison with the β-Cautious Strategy
In this section, we show that the proposed algorithm pro-
duces a measurement sequence that is, on average, within a
constant factor of the optimal ofﬂine cost. In what follows,
it is convenient to make use of the following constants:
N = 4 log(
σ2
β
σ2s
)
( 1
γ
)
(Lemma 3),
Cdist =
⎛
⎝
√
2√
σ2
β − σ2
s
+
π
√
σ2
β − σ2
s
σ2
β
⎞
⎠ ·
[
1 − √ γ
1 − σs
σβ
]
(Theorem 1),
C3 = 1
2σ2
s tm
γ2
1 − γ2 (Theorem 2).
We consider the case in which the hypothesis is not
very close to the starting location of the robot, given by
ˆr(0) >C 3σ(0)2. This assumption is not too restrictive. For
example, in our application C3 ≈ 6 × 10− 4 since tm ≈ 120,
σs ≈ π
12 ,a n d γ ≈ 0.1 (as stated in Section 10). In ﬁeld tri-
als, ˆr(0) ≈ σ(0) ≈ 100 m. In subsequent analysis we also use
ˆr(0) instead of ∥s(0) − s(1)∥ in the upper bound, since the
range to the hypothesis is always greater than the distance
between the starting location and the ﬁrst measurement.
The robot begins with an estimate of x⋆ as ˆx, a two-
dimensional Gaussian, but the optimal ofﬂine algorithm has
access to x⋆. Thus, a direct comparison of the two could pro-
duce arbitrarily bad results. One such example is x⋆ ≈ s(0)
and ˆr(0) →∞ : the β-Cautious strategy travels toward the
hypothesis, while the ofﬂine algorithm does not. However,
such cases occur with very small probability , and it is rea-
sonable to expect that on average the costs will be similar.
Therefore, we take a weighted average (expectation) over
possible conﬁgurations of the robot and true target, condi-
tioned on the prior hypothesis.
As before, let T (S) be the time cost of a sequence as
given by Eq. (1). Let the true target location be x⋆. Given the
β-Cautious measurement sequence, Sβ with cost T (Sβ(x⋆)),
we would like to compare to the unknown optimal solution,
S⋆
OFF , with cost T (S⋆
OFF (x⋆)). We will deﬁne the expected
performance ratio as
Ex⋆ [T (Sβ(x⋆))]
Ex⋆ [T (S⋆
OFF (x⋆ ))] . We derive a bound next.
Theorem 3. Let x⋆ be the true target location given a prior es-
timate ∼ N (ˆx(0),/Sigma1(0)).L e tˆr(0) >C 3σ(0)2 and ˆr(0) > ∥s(0) −
s(1)∥. In expectation overx⋆, the time taken by theβ-Cautious al-
gorithm is less than a constant times the optimal algorithm:
Ex⋆ [T (Sβ(x⋆))]
Ex⋆ [T (S⋆
OFF (x⋆))] ≤ C
with
C = N · tm + Cdistσ(0) + ˆr(0)
tm + ˆr(0) − C3σ(0)2 . (21)
Proof: Since T (S′) ≤ T (S⋆
OFF ) (Theorem 2), and S′ does not
change as a function of Z, it sufﬁces to show that
Ex⋆ [T (Sβ(x⋆))]
Ex⋆ [T (S′(x⋆))] = Ex⋆ [N · tm +Cdistσ(0)+∥s(0)− s(1)∥]
Ex⋆ [max(r⋆(0) − C3σ(0)2, 0) + tm] ≤ C,
(22)
where C does not depend on x⋆.
To establish a constant bound, we would like to remove
all variables that involve the true target location (a random
variable), or the measurement values. Note that the upper
bound established in Theorem 1 is not a function of the true
target location. It remains to ﬁnd the lower expected bounds.
Observe that the denominator contains the maximum
of two convex functions, which is a convex function. Since
the norm r⋆(0) =∥ s(0) − x⋆∥ is a convex function, the mean
distance to the target is less than the distance to the mean of
the prior. Finally , by Jensen’s inequality , E[f (x)] ≥ f (E[x])
if the function f (x) is convex. Since we again consider the
case of ˆr(0) >C 3σ(0)2, this provides a lower bound as
Equation(22) ≤ N · tm + Cdistσ(0) + ˆr(0)
Ex⋆ [r⋆(0) − C3σ(0)2] + Ex⋆ [tm]
≤ N · tm + Cdistσ(0) + ˆr(0)
tm + ˆr(0) − C3σ(0)2 .
In expectation over the true target location and measure-
ment noise, theβ-Cautious costs only a constant factor more
than the optimal algorithm, which knows the true target lo-
cation. □
Journal of Field Robotics DOI 10.1002/rob
308 • Journal of Field Robotics—2014
8.3. Worst-case Online Cost
We now consider the case of an optimal algorithm operating
without the access to the true target location. Such an algo-
rithm executes with the same restrictions as the β-Cautious
algorithm: it begins with a prior estimate and must react to
the value of each measurement, i.e., iteratively update the
hypothesis using the EKF and plan measurement locations.
As before, we assume the measurement sequence Z is cho-
sen by an independent adversary , similar to the analysis in
Section 7, and we present a lower bound on the cost of an
optimal online algorithm in the worst case.
As seen in Section 7, the hypothesis may shift as a result
of a measurement. To connect this result to the previous the-
orem, we ﬁrst show that there always exists a measurement
sequence in which the hypothesis does not shift.
Lemma 8. If s(i) is the sensing location from where the ith
measurement is obtained and N (ˆx(i − 1),/Sigma1(i − 1)) is the prior
target hypothesis, then there exists a measurement z(i) such that
∥ ˆx(i − 1) − s(i)∥=∥ ˆx(i) − s(i)∥,
where N (ˆx(i),/Sigma1(i)) is the posterior target hypothesis obtained
using EKF update.
Proof: The proof follows directly from the EKF update
equations given in Eq. (2) when the residual is zero [i.e.,
y(i) = 0]. □
The above lemma suggests that for every instance, any
algorithm, including the online optimal algorithm, can re-
ceive a valid set of measurements where the mean of the
hypothesis does not change with the EKF update (the co-
variance, however, changes). If the adversary can increase
the cost by choosing other measurements, then Eq. (23) is a
lower bound on the worst-case cost. Otherwise, it is exactly
the worst-case cost.
Theorem 4. Let S⋆
ONL be the optimal online, bearing-only (not-
necessarily-ambiguous) measurement sequence. LetS⋆
ONL require
time T (S⋆
ONL (Z)) to reduce σx and σy by the constant γ using
EKF updates. Then T (S′) is also a lower bound on the maximum
time required by S⋆
ONL as follows:
max
Z
T (S⋆
ONL (Z)) ≥ T (S′)
= max
[
ˆr(0) − σ2(0)
2 · tmσ2
s
( γ2
1 − γ2
)
, 0
]
+ tm. (23)
Proof: First, by Lemma 8, there exists a measurement se-
quence such that the hypothesis does not shift position.
In this case, we are examining the case of a measurement
sequence gathering information about a ﬁxed point, ˆ x(0).
Then the covariance after all measurements are collected is
exactly the same form as that of the FIM, given in Eq. (15).
The full analysis is similar to that of Theorem 2. However, in
this case, substitute ˆx(0) for x⋆ to arrive at the desired value
for T (S′). □
The presented bound is similar to Theorem 2, except the
dependence is on initial hypothesis ˆr(0) instead of the true
target location x⋆.T h es e q u e n c eS′, when executed with
respect to the true target location, deﬁnes a global mini-
mum cost for any algorithm. When executed with respect
to the prior hypothesis, it deﬁnes a lower bound on the time
taken by any online algorithm that uses an EKF or similar
estimators.
8.4. Comparison of Worst-case Online
Performance
In this section, we deﬁne the performance ratio as the ra-
tio of the worst-case execution times of two measurement
sequences. Using the result of Section 7 and the previ-
ous section, we show that the performance ratio of the β-
Cautious strategy and any other online strategy is bounded
above by a constant.
Theorem 5. Given a prior estimate of a target location
∼ N (ˆx(0),/Sigma1(0)),l e t Z be the measurements received by an
active localization algorithm. Let ˆr(0) >C 3σ(0)2 and ˆr(0) >
∥s(0) − s(1)∥. For any true target location, the time taken by the
β-Cautious algorithm for any system parametersβ, tm, γ,a n dσs
is less than a constant times worst-case cost of the optimal online
algorithm employing an EKF. Furthermore, for our known system
values, the time required by the β-Cautious algorithm satisﬁes
maxZ T (Sβ(Z))
maxZ T (S⋆
ONL (Z)) ≤ 5.439. (24)
Proof: maxZ T (Sβ(Z)) was presented in closed form in The-
orem 1, where we again let ˆr(0) > ∥s(0) − s(1)∥.S i n c eS′ is a
lower bound on the worst-case online algorithm, as shown
i nT h e o r e m4 ,w eh a v et h a tT (S′) ≤ maxZ T (S⋆
ONL (Z)).
Then it sufﬁces to show that
maxZ T (Sβ(Z))
maxZ T (S⋆
ONL (Z)) ≤ N · tm + Cdistσ(0) + ˆr(0)
ˆr(0) − C3σ(0)2 + tm
≤ 5.439. (25)
The values for the remainder of the terms ( σs , γ,a n d
tm), which determine N , C3 and Cdist, will be constant, but
depend on the speciﬁc system used. We use the known
system values from Section 10, initial hypothesis uncer-
tainty and range from Section 6.2, andβ = 0.1. For reference,
ˆr(0) ≈ σ(0) ≈ 100, tm ≈ 120, σs ≈ π
12 ,a n dγ ≈ 0.1. □
The results presented in Theorem 3 show that the
β-Cautious algorithm is within a constant of the optimal
ofﬂine strategy on average. Theorem 5 shows that no other
algorithm will have a signiﬁcantly lower worst-case per-
formance. However, the constants established in Eqs. (21)
and (24) still depend on system noise, measurement time,
Journal of Field Robotics DOI 10.1002/rob
Vander Hook et al.: Cautious Greedy Strategy for Bearing-only Active Localization • 309
Table I. Simulation Parameters.
Range [r(0)] Measurement time ( tm) Desired precision ( γ) β
Value 220 m 120 s 0.1 0.1
Evaluated in Figure 11(a) Figure 11(d) Figures 10(a),10(b),10(c),11(c) Figures 10(d),11(b)
and other nonrandom factors. In the next section, we eval-
uate the effect of these parameters on the comparisons in
simulation.
9. SIMULATIONS
In this section, we conduct numerical studies of the main re-
sults presented. First studied is the effect of Lemma 1, which
shows that the β-Cautious strategy chooses measurement
locations to minimize the effect of keeping only a single hy-
pothesis. Second, we illustrate the upper bound presented
in Theorem 1 as a function of the system parameters and
starting conditions. Finally , we illustrate Theorem 2 and
Theorem 3 to show how the performance ratio (time re-
quired divided by optimal time) changes with the starting
conditions.
Our simulated setup was as follows. The β-Cautious
strategy was implemented as described in Section 6. An
initial hypothesis was given as ˆ x(0) ∼ N (02×1,σ 2(0) · I2×2),
with σ(0) = 100. The sensor is initially placed 220 m away
from ˆx, measurement time was assumed to be 120, and sen-
sor noiseσs was set to 15 degrees. The true target location,x⋆,
was repeatedly drawn with replacement from the prior for
N = 1000 trials. For each suchx⋆, the algorithm was run, and
all measurement locations and values were recorded. Some
of the parameters were individually varied to illustrate their
effect, as shown in Table I. As discussed in Section 10, these
parameters closely match our ﬁeld implementation.
The ﬁrst results (Figures 8 and 9) evaluate the asser-
tions of Section 5, namely that by carefully choosing mea-
surement locations for an EKF, we can closely approxi-
mate the bimodal measurement PDF. For this evaluation,
we compared the performance of the β-Cautious strategy
with a multiple hypotheses ﬁlter. There are two predomi-
nant methods for producing a target estimate from multiple
hypotheses, both of which we implemented for comparison.
First, the output could be the most likely of the hypotheses
[the target estimate ˆxi with the highest p(ˆxi|Z), for measure-
ment sequence Z]. A multiple hypothesis extended Kalman
ﬁlter (MH-EKF) (Reid, 1979) captures this approach. An-
other interpretation of the hypotheses is available through
a Gaussian sum ﬁlter [(GSF, proposed in Alspach and Soren-
son (1972), but also realized in interacting mixture model-
based ﬁlters (Bar-Shalom & Tse, 1975; Bar-Shalom et al.,
2001)]. Using the GSF and similar methods, the output is the
weighted average of all hypotheses. In both cases, we did
not implement measurement gating or hypothesis merg-
ing, since these are alternative methods of truncating the
PDF (see Blackman, 2004; Cox & Hingorani, 1996; Reid,
1979), and instead we maintained all the hypotheses for
comparison.
Figure 8. (a) The observed probability that the MH-EKF tracks a different hypothesis than the β-Cautious strategy . Note that
for small β,t h e β-Cautious strategy causes the EKF to track the correct hypothesis more often. (b) The normalized error of the
ﬁnal estimate [ ∥ ˆx(n) − x⋆∥/∥ ˆx(0) − x⋆∥] as a function of the β parameter. The median error is shown for the Gaussian Sum Filter,
MH-EKF, andβ-Cautious strategy using an EKF. Note that increasing β results in more error, but at less cost as shown in Figure 10.
Journal of Field Robotics DOI 10.1002/rob
310 • Journal of Field Robotics—2014
Figure 9. Two examples of the effect of the parameter β, comparing the difference in ﬁnal estimates using an EKF, MH-EKF,
and Gaussian sum ﬁlter. Shown is the median error over 1,000 trials, after each measurement, for all three ﬁlters, as well as an
“omniscient” EKF that was given the correct, unambiguous measurements. (a) With β = 0.01, we notice agreement and small ﬁnal
error. (b) With β> 0.2, we notice reduced performance in all ﬁlters. These observations suggest that the measurement locations
corresponding to low values of β are useful for mitigating the effect of ambiguous measurements, as suggested by Lemma 1.
As implied by Lemma 1, we expect that decreas-
ing β would reduce the necessity for tracking multiple
hypotheses. This can be checked by verifying that a
multiple-hypotheses ﬁlter does not produce signiﬁcantly
different output when β is small. The β-Cautious strat-
egy was run as designed (using an EKF to estimate the
target state). Depending on the speciﬁc setting for β, the
algorithm chose an adaptive sequence of measurement lo-
cations, of length k ∈ [4, 12]. Using the measurement loca-
tions and values, the set of 2 k hypotheses was then created
using Eq. (7) (during execution, the algorithm did not have
access to these other hypotheses). The 2 k individual hy-
potheses correspond to all combinations of “forward” or
“backward” measurements for each measurement location.
The β-Cautious strategy , by employing an EKF, tracks one of
the 2k hypotheses directly—corresponding to all “forward”
measurements—and discards the rest. Conversely , the MH-
EKF will evaluate all the hypotheses, and output the highest
weighted hypothesis as the target estimate. According to
Lemma 1, we would expect that small β would correspond
to similar output between both algorithms. In Figure 8(a),
we plot the observed probability that the β-Cautious strat-
egy tracks a hypothesis different from the MH-EKF as a func-
tion of β. We see that for small values of β, this occurs with
very small probability . Also shown is the output of an EKF
that has the correct, unambiguous bearings as input. As
expected, with small β, the unambiguous EKF has nearly
identical output. These observations conﬁrm the idea that
β captures the risk from ambiguous measurements, i.e., of
tracking the “wrong” hypothesis.
Another meaningful comparison is the error of the ﬁ-
nal estimates using all three methods (GSF, MH-EKF, and
β-Cautious), which is presented in Figure 8(b) and Figure
9. In all simulations, the ﬁnal covariance was equal, but
the error of the estimate was observed to vary with β. Fig-
ure 8(b) shows the median error of the ﬁnal estimate for
β ∈ [0.01, 0.45]. Note that increasing the caution require-
ment (β → 0) produces less error in the estimate of the target
location, even though the covariance does not change. In-
terestingly ,all ﬁlter output was less accurate as β increased,
suggesting that the β-Cautious measurement locations are
valuable for other ﬁltering techniques, not just the EKF.
Figure 9 shows the error after each measurement, for two
values of β and all three ﬁltering techniques. In Figure 9(b),
the median decrease (posterior error over prior error) was
40% at best, while it was less than 3% in Figure 9(a).
As shown in Section 7, the parameterβ has a signiﬁcant
effect on the time required to localize the target, but so do
the other system parameters and starting conditions. The
focus of the next simulations is to evaluate the effect of
these parameters on the maximum time required to localize
a target. For each different simulation, one parameter was
varied (see Table I). Equation (13) is plotted, along with
the aggregate observed values for the time to localize the
target. In all cases, the theoretical bounds held as shown in
Figure 10.
The ﬁnal simulations (Figure 11) examine the relation-
ship between the β-Cautious strategy and the optimal algo-
rithm. The distance traveled and number of measurements
required was recorded. Shown is the theoretical constant,
derived in Section 8.2. Below this is the mean observed time
T (Sβ) divided by the mean of the lower bound on the opti-
mal time, TS′ , from Eq. (23).
From these trials, and the theoretical results already
presented, we conclude that the β parameter captures a
tradeoff between the accuracy of the ﬁnal estimate and
Journal of Field Robotics DOI 10.1002/rob
Vander Hook et al.: Cautious Greedy Strategy for Bearing-only Active Localization • 311
Figure 10. Simulation studies of the possible conﬁgurations and the resulting upper bound. We vary the ﬁnal required uncertainty
(γ) and evaluate the costs as shown in Theorem 1. (a) The distance traveled as γ decreases (corresponding to a more precise ﬁnal
estimate). (b) The number of measurements taken. (c) The total execution time as γ decreases. Part (d) shows the tradeoff between
increasing the parameter β and the resulting time required to localize the target. Note that the target can be localized more quickly
by increasing risk. The discrete drops in time correspond to removing a measurement from the sequence, and the remaining
reduction in time is from placing the measurements closer together. Both will cause more error in the ﬁnal estimate, as shown in
Figure 8(b).
the time spent localizing a target. Small β leads to better
accuracy for all ﬁlters examined, at the cost of increased
time spent traveling and taking measurements. Crucially , it
was observed that using an extended Kalman ﬁlter is suf-
ﬁcient to produce ﬁnal estimates that are consistent and
accurate, for small values of β.
The time bound in Theorem 1 was predicated on the
use of the EKF, through Lemma 1 [however, the results in
Section 8.1 apply to any unbiased ﬁlter (Van Trees, 1971)]. An
interesting future result would be to bound the shift in the
hypothesis location for other ﬁltering techniques, allowing
similar upper bounds to be established when measurements
are planned against the corresponding output. In this work,
we have observed that when using the β-Cautious strategy ,
the EKF performs as good as more “expressive” ﬁlters so
long as β is small, thus allowing a closed-form guarantee of
the time required to localize the target. In the next section,
we will show that our assumptions and results hold during
ﬁeld deployments.
10. FIELD EXPERIMENTS
After establishing the upper bound in closed form and in
simulation and evaluating the consistency of the algorithm,
we deployed our system for ﬁeld trials. Before presenting
the results, we give the details of our ﬁeld implementation.
Our platform, shown in Figure 12, is composed of a
mobile robot and directional antenna mounted on a servo
motor. Our goal is to provide this system as a drop-in aug-
mentation for humans tracking the radio-tagged ﬁsh. An
onboard laptop computer controls the majority of the high-
level planning. Our software architecture is based on the
Journal of Field Robotics DOI 10.1002/rob
312 • Journal of Field Robotics—2014
Figure 11. The theoretical performance ratio [Eq. (21)] and observed performance ratio ( E[T (Sβ)]/E[T (S′)]) as a function of (a) the
starting range to the hypothesis, ˆr(0), (b) the desired risk (increasing β), and (c) the measurement time (increasing tm). Note that in
some cases the theoretical bounds are quite loose. This results from our analysis: we provide an upper bound on the worst case. In
practice, the worst case is rarely if ever encountered.
Robot Operating System (2012) and is modular enough to
allow us to redeploy on a robotic boat during the summer
months (Tokekar et al., 2013). During winter, the chassis is
a Clearpath Robotics Husky A100 (2012). The Husky has a
maximum velocity of less than 2 m/s. Typically , we operate
at 1 m/s.
The antenna and an example tag are shown in Figure 12
and were provided by Advanced Telemetry Systems (2012).
The radio tags operate in the 48–50 MHz range and emit
an uncoded pulse at approximately 1.1 Hz. These trans-
missions are detectable from approximately 100 m. Thus,
it is possible to determine if a target is nearby simply by
sampling a nonzero signal strength indicator.
To ﬁnd the bearing to the target, we rotate the antenna
to ﬁnd the orientation that corresponds to the maximum
signal strength. We typically sample every 15 ◦.T oﬁ n da
bearing with maximum signal strength that does not lie
directly on a sampled orientation, we ﬁt a polynomial to
the samples and solve for the bearing of maximum signal
strength as shown in Tokekar et al. (2011). We have estab-
lished from ﬁeld trials that the process of taking a bear-
ing measurement requires approximately 1–2 min. We have
calibrated the bearing measurements using radio transmit-
ters deployed in known locations, and we established that
the measurements have approximately a Gaussian error of
σs ≈ 15◦. Since the antenna is symmetric, the true bearing is
unknown. Instead, the inferred bearing could point toward
or away from the target.
The total system weighs less than 40 kg and is rou-
tinely operated on lakes with only a few inches of ice cover.
Battery life is currently limited to 3–4 h of continuous oper-
ation. The robot can be remotely operated, including taking
bearing measurements automatically or manually , direct ve-
locity control, or point-to-point navigation. In our ﬁeld de-
ployments, the robot operated entirely autonomously .
We conducted two types of experiments. In the ﬁrst
set of trials, we evaluated the sensing model and the upper
bound directly . For these experiments, a transmitting radio
Journal of Field Robotics DOI 10.1002/rob
Vander Hook et al.: Cautious Greedy Strategy for Bearing-only Active Localization • 313
Figure 12. (a) The robotics platform employed in ﬁeld tests. Notice the octagonal antenna used to detect nearby radio transmitters,
and the servomotor used to rotate the antenna. The robot has been tested on multiple lakes in Minnesota, including Lakes Gervais,
Staring, Keller, and Phalen. (b) The antenna used to gather bearing measurements. The antenna is radially symmetric, producing
ambiguous bearing measurements. The antenna is approximately 56 cm (22 in) in diameter and is mounted on a servomotor attached
to the robotic chassis. (c) A radio transmitter that is surgically implanted in invasive ﬁsh. Each transmitter (or “tag”) has a unique
frequency and transmits an uncoded pulse at approximately 1.1 Hz. The tags are nearly 7.5 cm (3 in.) long.
Figure 13. Two single-target ﬁeld trials. Parameters were σ2
β = 1a n dσ2
s =
(π
8
)2
. In both cases, the time for the system to localize
the target adhered to the theoretical bounds. (a) The two σ uncertainty ellipses are shown for the prior and ﬁnal estimates. The
ﬁnal error was less than 5 m after only four measurements. The total experiment area was approximately 70 m by 64 m. (b) At Lake
Gervais, MN. With no prior information, the initial estimate was constructed using the routine described in Section 6.2, producing
the large red circle shown. The measurement locations narrowed the uncertainty to the ﬁnal circle given as a dashed line. The true
target location is labeled as a black x.
tag was placed in a ﬁeld measuring approximately 64 by
70 m [Figure 13(a)]. We provided a prior target estimate for
each trial, and we evaluated the cost to localize the target to
the desired bounds and the accuracy of the ﬁnal estimate.
The second set of trials was used to verify the intended
application, including the transition from a search phase to
a completed localization, including initializing consistent
hypotheses for each nearby target [Figures 13(b) and 14].
We present one example from the ﬁrst set and two from the
second set.
In the ﬁrst example, shown in Figure 13(a), the input
was a starting hypothesis that encompassed the experi-
ment area (2- σ bounds was 70 m, with a starting error of
30 m). The goal of these trials was to establish the correct-
ness of the upper bound and verify that a small number
of measurements is sufﬁcient to localize a static target. Us-
ing these starting parameters and the system data reported
in Section 10, we can derive the expected time using Eq.
(13). Constructing bearing measurements takes less than
2 min and the chassis velocity is approximately 1 m per
Journal of Field Robotics DOI 10.1002/rob
314 • Journal of Field Robotics—2014
Figure 14. A successful experiment demonstrating the localization of two nearby targets concurrently . For this trial, no prior
information was available. After detecting a nearby target, the algorithm proceeds in three steps: (a) searching for the boundaries of
the ﬁrst detected target, (b) searching for the boundaries of the remaining targets, and (c) using bearing measurements to reduce the
uncertainty in the target estimates. (d) The initial and ﬁnal uncertainty shown on a map. The experiment area was approximately
300 m across, and the ﬁnal error of the estimates was less than 15 m.
second (tm ≈ 120). To achieve a desired ﬁnal covariance of
less than one-tenth the original, we expect a travel dis-
tance of less than 350 m, and four measurements [based on
Eq. (13)]. We found that the experimental results agreed with
the theoretical analysis. Speciﬁcally , the ﬁnal covariance
was less than 6 m, one sigma bound, four measurements
were required, and the robot traveled less than 70 m in the
given example. The ﬁnal error of the estimate was less than
4m .
The next experiments [see one example in Figure 13(b)
conducted on a frozen lake in Minnesota] were to verify the
algorithm and system in the intended operating environ-
ment, as well as the initialization procedure described. We
deployed radio tags in known locations and attempted to
localize them using no prior estimate. The robot was started
from inside the sensing circle of a single tag. The robot con-
structed an initial estimate using the initialization routine
discussed in Section 6.2, then localized the target by choos-
ing measurement locations as shown.
Finally , in Figure 14 we test the full algorithm, from
no prior estimates to initialization and localization of two
nearby targets. Two tags were deployed and their GPS coor-
dinates recorded. The robot was sent along a path that inter-
sected the sensing radius of one of the tags. From a position
from which it could detect the nearby tag [Figure 14(a), with
frequency 48341 detected], it ﬁrst searched for the bound-
aries of the sensing circle. Then, it returned to the center of
this circle and searched for other nearby tags [detecting the
sensing circle corresponding to tag 48931 in Figure 14(b)].
Finally , it began the iterative process of enumerating can-
didate measurement locations and taking measurements of
either tag. The ﬁnal measurement locations and the corre-
sponding frequency for each are displayed in Figure 14(c),
with the ﬁnal estimates shown in Figure 14(d) compared
Journal of Field Robotics DOI 10.1002/rob
Vander Hook et al.: Cautious Greedy Strategy for Bearing-only Active Localization • 315
with the initial estimates and the recorded GPS locations of
the tags. The GPS locations are accurate to within 5 m.
The ﬁnal covariance for 48341 had eigenvalues 56 and
168 m2 (corresponding to an error ellipse with radii 7 and
12 m), starting from an initial covariance with eigenvalues
1,380 m 2. The ﬁnal covariance for 48931 had eigenvalues
49 and 127 m 2 (radii 7 and 11 m), starting from an initial
covariance with eigenvalues 1,758 m 2. The ﬁnal errors for
48341 and 48931 were 27 and 2 3 m, respectively .
We found that in all cases in all experiments, the num-
ber of measurements matched the predicted upper bounds,
and the distance traveled was less than the theoretical limit.
This leads us to believe that the theoretical bounds are a
good prediction of the performance of the system and pro-
duce reliable estimates of the time required to localize one
or more nearby targets.
11. CONCLUSION
In this work, we examined the problem of using a mobile
robot to locate a radio transmitter using a directional an-
tenna. We presented an active localization algorithm suit-
able for systems that have nonzero measurement time. The
bearing measurement model was discussed, along with a
potential application domain and its challenges. The prob-
lem was formulated as a minimum-time, active localization
problem with high measurement cost. We showed that, in
the case of using RSSI-based bearing measurements, am-
biguity can be mitigated by structuring the measurement
sequence carefully . The algorithm was analyzed to show an
upper bound on the time cost as a function of the system
parameters (sensing noise, measurement time, chassis ve-
locity) and tracking objective (initial uncertainty versus ﬁnal
requested uncertainty). The resulting closed-form analysis
is amenable to engineering tradeoffs and comparisons with
other bearing-only active localization algorithms.
We also presented the ﬁrst lower bound on the op-
timal cost of bearing-only localization of static targets. The
lower bound will be useful to algorithm and system design-
ers as a base-line comparison. To compare the performance
of the β-Cautious algorithm directly to the unknown opti-
mal algorithm, we presented simulations and closed-form
analysis. We also presented a comparison to the optimal
cost of an online, EKF-based algorithm, which allowed us
to present a worst-case bound. Thus, we have shown that
our presented algorithm is near optimal when used in the
application described.
Finally , we discussed a robust initialization procedure.
The combination of initialization and localization ensures
that a target can be localized in bounded time. In ﬁeld exper-
iments, a mobile robot was able to locate two transmitting
radio tags to within a desired uncertainty in predictable,
bounded time.
One extension we have identiﬁed for these algorithms
is to accommodate cooperating robots. A major challenge
when designing a ﬁeld system for cooperative tracking with
multiple robots is communication. The communication con-
straint complicates the optimal algorithm design: When and
where should the robots meet to communicate? Does the
optimal multirobot algorithm enforce communication con-
straints at all or should the robots proceed independently?
Finally , we are working to extend the results to a moving
target.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank Stergios Roumeliotis for
useful discussions and suggestions and Przemek Bajer for
providing ﬁsh-tracking domain expertise. This work is sup-
ported by NSF Awards No. 1111638, No. 0916209, No.
0917676, and No. 0936710.
Appendix A: Proof of Lemma 1
Essentially , we want the probability mass of the target dis-
tribution outside the±π
2 window to be less thanβ, as shown
in Figure 2(b). Recall that the innovation, (z − ˆz), is assumed
to be normally distributed with variance given by S from
Eq. (5). This implies z− ˆz√
S ∼ N (0, 1). Thus,
p
(
z − ˆz ≥ π
2
)
= p
(z − ˆz√
S
≥ π
2
√
S
)
= 1 − /Phi1
( π
2
√
S
)
(A.1)
with the function /Phi1representing the standard Gaussian
CDF. We want this probability to be less than β
2 ,
1 − /Phi1
( π
2
√
S
)
≤ β
2 ↔
√
S ≤ π
2 · /Phi1− 1 (
1 − β
2
). (A.2)
We call the right-hand sideσβ in the remainder of the paper,
which makes the variance constraint in Eq. (A.2) S ≤ σ2
β .
From this relationship we can derive a constraint on the
measurement locations as follows. We begin by substituting
the value of S from the EKF formulation,
S = H/Sigma1HT + R,
S =
[ − sin α
r
cosα
r
][σ2
x 0
0 σ2
y
]
⎡
⎢⎣
− sin α
r
cosα
r
⎤
⎥⎦ + σ2
s ,
S = 1
r2
(
σ2
x sin2 α + σ2
y cos2 α
)
+ σ2
s .
Notice that all values of the previous equation are known,
except for the position of the sensor [r(i)a n dα(i)]. Applying
the maximum variance constraint S ≤ σ2
β allows us to ﬁnd
Journal of Field Robotics DOI 10.1002/rob
316 • Journal of Field Robotics—2014
a range constraint for measurement locations,
r ≥
√
σ2
x sin2 α + σ2
y cos2 α
σ2
β − σ2
s
. (A.3)
Appendix B: Proof of Lemma 2
Consider the information form of the covariance update
given in Eq. (6). Substituting the value of H and R gives a
one-step closed-form recursion as follows:
/Sigma1(i + 1)− 1 = /Sigma1(i)− 1
+ 1
σ2
s
⎡
⎢⎢⎣
− sin α(i)
r(i)
cos α(i)
r(i)
⎤
⎥⎥⎦
[ − sinα(i)
r(i)
cos α(i)
r(i)
]
.
Note that α alternates between π
2 and 0 to ﬁnd the following
recursion for each pair of measurements:
/Sigma1(i + 2)− 1 = /Sigma1(i)− 1 +
⎡
⎣
1
σ2
s r(i)2 0
00
⎤
⎦ +
⎡
⎣
00
0 1
σ2
s r(i + 1)2
⎤
⎦.
Substitute the value for r(i) from (9) and expand /Sigma1to ﬁnd
/Sigma1(i + 2)− 1 =
⎡
⎢⎢⎣
1
σ2
x (i) 0
0 1
σ2
y (i)
⎤
⎥⎥⎦ +
⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎣
σ2
β − σ2
s
σ2
s σ2
x (i) 0
0
σ2
β − σ2
s
σ2
s σ2
y (i)
⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎦
=
⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣
1
σ2
x (i)
(
1+
σ2
β − σ2
s
σ2
s
)
0
0 1
σ2
y (i)
(
1+
σ2
β − σ2
s
σ2
s
)
⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦
.
Since 1 +
σ2
β − σ2s
σ2s
=
(
σ2
β
σ2s
)
, the above factors to
/Sigma1(i + 2)− 1 =
(
σ2
β
σ2
s
)
· /Sigma1(i)− 1. (B.1)
Thus each pair of measurements is a constant-factor increase
in information, or a decrease in prior uncertainty .
Appendix C: Proof of Lemma 3
Suppose the measurement sequence takesN measurements.
The covariance at the end of the measurement sequence is
required to be
/Sigma1(N ) =
[γ2 · σ2
x (0) 0
0 γ2 · σ2
y (0)
]
= γ2 · /Sigma1(0).
Since each pair of measurements reduces the uncertainty in
both the x and y directions by a constant factor, we have
from Eq. (12),
/Sigma1(i + 2)− 1 =
(
σ2
β
σ2
s
)
· /Sigma1(i)− 1.
The above shows
1
γ2 /Sigma1(0)− 1 =
(
σ2
β
σ2
s
)N
2
· /Sigma1(0)− 1 ↔ N = 4 log(
σ2
β
σ2s
)
(
1
γ
)
.
Appendix D: Proof of Lemma 4
In the local frame of the target hypothesis, measurements
are taken along the x and y axis at ﬁxed, decreasing ranges.
To derive an upper bound, we can solve a circular case
with both starting variances equal to the maximum, i.e.,
σx (0) = σy (0) = max(σx,σy ).
First, note that each sensor location is along a principal
axis of the local coordinate frame, with ˆx at the origin. Note
also that there are N
2 movements from the x axis to the y axis
and N
2 − 1 movements from the y axis to the x axis. Each
measurement takes place at a ﬁxed range, r(i) = σ(i)√
σ2
β−σ2s
and
r(i + 1) ≤ r(i). Thus, we have the following relationship:
N− 1∑
i=1
∥s(i + 1) − s(i)∥=
N
2∑
i=1
∥s(2i − 1) − s(2i)∥
+
N
2 − 1∑
i=1
∥s(2i) − s(2i + 1)∥
≤
N
2∑
i=1
√
2 · r(2i − 1) +
N
2 − 1∑
i=1
√
2 · r(2i)
≤
N
2∑
i=1
√
2√
σ2
β − σ2
s
σx (2i − 1)
+
N
2 − 1∑
i=1
√
2√
σ2
β − σ2
s
σy (2i).
Note that σx (0) = σy (0), and after a pair of measurements,
the variances are again equal [i.e., σx (i) = σy (i + 1)]. The
desired result follows.
Appendix E: Proof of Lemma 5
To examine ∥ ˆx(i + 1) − ˆx(i)∥ (the shift from a single mea-
surement), observe that the difference between two hy-
pothesis locations is given in closed form by the EKF as
ˆx(i + 1) = ˆx(i) + K(i + 1) [z(i) − ˆz(i)]. We can ﬁnd the max-
imum shift as follows (we drop the current time indices i
Journal of Field Robotics DOI 10.1002/rob
Vander Hook et al.: Cautious Greedy Strategy for Bearing-only Active Localization • 317
for clarity):
ˆx(i + 1) − ˆx = K [z − ˆz]
= /Sigma1HT [
H/Sigma1HT + σ2
s
]− 1
[z − ˆz]
=
[σ2
x 0
0 σ2
y
]
⎡
⎢⎢⎣
− 1
r sinα
1
r cos α
⎤
⎥⎥⎦
×
[ 1
r2
(
σ2
x sin2 α + σ2
y cos2 α
)
+ σ2
s
]− 1
[z − ˆz] .
Observe that α takes the value π
2 and 0 over a pair of mea-
surements. The two possible values of ˆx(i + 1) − ˆx are
ˆx(i + 1) − ˆx =
⎡
⎣
−σ2
x
1
r σ2
x + r · σ2
s
0
⎤
⎦|z − ˆz| if α = π
2 ,
ˆx(i + 1) − ˆx =
⎡
⎢⎣
0
σ2
y
1
r σ2
y + r · σ2
s
⎤
⎥⎦|z − ˆz| if α = 0,
from which we can see that when the sensor is at a location
perpendicular to the direction of σx (σy ), the target hypoth-
esis will shift only in the ±x (±y) direction. We can proceed
with measurements corresponding to α = π
2 , as the other
direction is similar. By including the constraint on range,
r = σx√
σ2
β−σ2s
,
∥ ˆx(i + 1) − ˆx∥=| z − ˆz|·
⎛
⎝
σx
√
σ2
β − σ2
s
σ2
β
⎞
⎠ .
Finally , notice that the innovation, z − ˆz, cannot be more
than π in a bearing-only setting. This gives a ﬁnal upper
bound on the displacement of the hypothesis along the per-
pendicular axis as
∥ ˆx(i + 1) − ˆx∥≤ σx ·
π
√
σ2
β − σ2
s
σ2
β
.
REFERENCES
Advanced telemetry systems, http://atstrack.com. Accessed
November, 2012.
Alspach, D., & Sorenson, H. (1972). Nonlinear Bayesian estima-
tion using Gaussian sum approximations. IEEE Transac-
tions on Automatic Control, 17(4), 439–448.
Bar-Shalom, Y ., Li, X.-R., & Kirubarajan, T. (2001). Estimation
with applications to tracking and navigation. New York:
John Wiley & Sons.
Bar-Shalom, Y ., & Tse, E. (1975). Tracking in a cluttered envi-
ronment with probabilistic data association. Automatica,
11, 451–460.
Bishop, A., & Pathirana, P . (2008). Optimal trajectories for hom-
ing navigation with bearing measurements. In Proceed-
ings of the 2008 International Federation of Automatic
Control Congress. Seoul, Korea (pp. 12117–12123).
Blackman, S. (2004). Multiple hypothesis tracking for multiple
target tracking. IEEE AE Systems Magazine, 19(1), 5–18.
Bopardikar, S.D. (2010). Pursuit strategies for autonomous
vehicles. Ph.D. thesis, University of California, Santa
Barbara.
Borri, A., Bopardikar, S.D., Hespanha, J., & Di Benedetto, M.D.
(2011). Hide-and-seek with directional sensing. In World
Congress (vol. 18, pp. 9343–9348).
Clearpath robotics, http://clearpathrobotics.com. Accessed
November, 2012.
Cox, I., & Hingorani, S. (1996). An efﬁcient implementation of
Reid’s multiple hypothesis tracking algorithm and its eval-
uation for the purpose of visual tracking. IEEE Transac-
tions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 18(2),
138–150.
Derenick, J., Fink, J., & Kumar, V . (2011). Localization using
ambiguous bearings from radio signal strength. In Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE/RSJ International Conference on In-
telligent Robots and Systems. IEEE.
Forney, C., Manii, E., Farris, M., Moline, M., & Lowe, C. (2012).
Tracking of a tagged leopard shark with an AUV: Sen-
sor calibration and state estimation. Proceedings of the
2012 International Conference on Robotics and Automa-
tion (ICRA). Saint Paul, MN (pp. 5315–5321).
Frew, E. (2009). Providing quality of service of information
through mobility. In Proceedings of the American Control
Conference. St. Louis, Missouri, USA (pp. 2160–2165).
Frew, E.W. (2003). Observer trajectory generation for target-
motion estimation using monocular vision. Ph.D. thesis,
Stanford University.
Hammel, S.E., Liu, P .T., Hilliard, E.J., & Gong, K.F. (1989). Opti-
mal observer motion for localization with bearing mea-
surements. Computers and Mathematics with Applica-
tions, 18(1–3), 171–180.
Hoffmann, G., & Tomlin, C. (2010). Mobile sensor network con-
trol using mutual information methods and particle ﬁlters.
IEEE Transactions on Control, 55(1), 32–47.
Li, X.R., & Jilkov, V .P . (2001). Survey of maneuvering target
tracking: III. Measurement models. Proceedings of SPIE,
4473(August), 423–446.
Li, X.R., & Jilkov, V .P . (2003). Survey of maneuvering tar-
get tracking: I: Dynamic models. IEEE Transactions on
Aerospace and Electronic Systems, 39(4), 1333–1364.
Li, X.R., & Jilkov, V .P . (2005). Survey of maneuvering target
tracking: V: Multiple-model methods. IEEE Transactions
on Aerospace and Electronic Systems, 41(4), 1255–1321.
Martinez, S., & Bullo, F. (2006). Optimal sensor placement and
motion coordination for target tracking. Automatica, 42(4),
661–668.
Merino, L., Caballero, F., & Ollero, A. (2010). Active sensing
for range-only mapping using multiple hypothesis. In
Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2010 IEEE/RSJ In-
ternational Conference (pp. 37–42). IEEE.
Journal of Field Robotics DOI 10.1002/rob
318 • Journal of Field Robotics—2014
Morbidi, F., & Mariottini, G.L. (2012). Active target tracking
and cooperative localization for teams of aerial vehicles.
Control Systems Technology , IEEE Transactions, PP(99),
1–1.
Pukelsheim, F. (2006). Optimal Design of Experiments.
Philadelphia, PA: Society for Industrial and Applied Math-
ematics.
Reid, D. (1979). An algorithm for tracking multiple targets. IEEE
Transactions on Automatic Control, ac-24(6), 843–854.
Robot operating system, http://ros.org. Accessed November,
2012.
Scerri, P ., Glinton, R., Owens, S., Scerri, D., & Sycara, K.
(2007). Geolocation of rf emitters by many UA Vs. In AIAA
Infotech@Aerospace 2007 Conference and Exhibit. Rohn-
ert Park, California.
Song, D., Kim, C., and Yi, J. (2012). Simultaneous localization
of multiple unknown and transient radio sources using a
mobile robot. IEEE Transactions on Robotics, 28(3), 668–
680.
Song, D., Member, S., Kim, C.-Y ., & Yi, J. (2011). On the time
to search for an intermittent signal source under a limited
sensing range. IEEE Transactions on Robotics, 27(2), 313–
323.
Thrun, S., Burgard, W., Fox, D., et al. (2005). Probabilistic
robotics (vol. 1). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Tokekar, P ., Branson, E., Vander Hook, J., & Isler, V . (2013). Cov-
erage and active localization for monitoring invasive ﬁsh
with an autonomous boat. IEEE Robotics and Automation
Magazine, 20(3), 33–41.
Tokekar, P ., Vander Hook, J., & Isler, V . (2011). Active target
localization for bearing based robotic telemetry . In Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE/RSJ International Conference on In-
telligent Robots and Systems. San Francisco, CA, USA.
Van Trees, H. (1971). Detection, estimation, and modulation the-
ory: Nonlinear modulation theory . Wiley Classics Library .
Hoboken, NJ, USA: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Vander Hook, J., Tokekar, P ., Branson, E., Bajer, P . G., Sorensen,
P . W., & Isler, V . (2012a). Local-search strategy for active
localization of multiple invasive ﬁsh. In Siciliano, B., &
Khatib, O. (eds.), 13th International Symposium on Ex-
perimental Robotics, page to appear. Springer Tracts in
Advanced Robotics.
Vander Hook, J., Tokekar, P ., & Isler, V . (2012b). Cautious greedy
strategy for bearing-based active localization: Experiments
and theoretical analysis. In Proceedings of the IEEE Inter-
national Conference on Robotics and Automation. Saint
Paul, MN, USA.
Zhou, K., & Roumeliotis, S. (2011). Multirobot active target
tracking with combinations of relative observations. IEEE
Transactions on Robotics, 27(4), 678–695.
Zhou, K., & Roumeliotis, S.I. (2008). Optimal motion
strategies for range-only constrained multisensor tar-
get tracking. IEEE Transactions on Robotics, 24(5),
1168–1185.
Journal of Field Robotics DOI 10.1002/rob