668 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 28, NO. 3, JUNE 2012
Simultaneous Localization of Multiple Unknown and
Transient Radio Sources Using a Mobile Robot
Dezhen Song, Senior Member, IEEE, Chang-Young Kim, Student Member, IEEE,
and Jingang Yi, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—We report system and algorithm developments that
utilize a single mobile robot to simultaneously localize multiple un-
known transient radio sources. Because of signal source anonymity,
short transmission durations, and dynamic transmission patterns,
the robot cannot treat the radio sources as continuous radio bea-
cons. To deal with this challenging localization problem, we model
the radio source behaviors using a novel spatiotemporal probabil-
ity occupancy grid that captures transient characteristics of radio
transmissions and tracks posterior probability distributions of ra-
dio sources. As a Monte Carlo method, a ridge walking motion
planning algorithm is proposed to enable the robot to efﬁciently
traverse the high-probability regions to accelerate the convergence
of the posterior probability distribution. We also formally show
that the time to ﬁnd a radio source is insensitive to the number
of radio sources, and hence, our algorithm has great scalability.
We have implemented the algorithms and extensively tested them
in comparison with two heuristic methods: a random walk and a
ﬁxed-route patrol. The localization time of our algorithms is con-
sistently shorter than that of the two heuristic methods.
Index Terms—Localization, networked robots, wireless sensor
network.
I. I NTRODUCTION
A
WIRELESS sensor network is usually composed of a
large number of miniature wireless sensor nodes with self-
conﬁgurable ad hoc networking capabilities. Its ability to col-
lect and gather information remotely over a large region makes
it a powerful tool in many applications. It may be used as a
new espionage tool that threatens our security and privacy. For
example, an enemy may deploy a sensor network in a battle-
ﬁeld to detect our troop movements. We need a countermeasure
for the potential misuse of the fast-developing sensor-network
technology.
From a listener perspective, a wireless sensor network is a
large set of multiple unknown transient radio sources. Here,
we report system and algorithm developments that enable a
Manuscript received June 14, 2011; revised November 15, 2011; accepted
January 3, 2012. Date of publication February 3, 2012; date of current version
June 1, 2012. This paper was recommended for publication by Associate Editor
J. A. Castellanos and Editor D. Fox upon evaluation of the reviewers’ comments.
This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation under
CAREER Grant IIS-0643298 and Grant MRI-0923203.
D. Song and C.-Y . Kim are with the Department of Computer Science and
Engineering, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843 USA (e-mail:
dzsong@cs.tamu.edu; kcyoung@cs.tamu.edu).
J. Yi is with the Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering,
Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ 08854 USA (e-mail: jgyi@rutgers.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the ﬁgures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TRO.2012.2183069
Fig. 1. Schematics of deployment of a single mobile robot to localize unknown
transient radio sources. The radio sources with dashed circles indicate that they
are sending radio signals.
single mobile robot to simultaneously localize multiple un-
known transient radio sources (see Fig. 1). Since the robot is
equipped with a directional antenna and on-board positional
sensors, the robot knows its own position and can detect re-
ceived signal strengths (RSS) as it travels in the ﬁeld of radio
sources. When the radio sources and communication protocols
are unknown, the robot cannot treat the radio sources as contin-
uous radio beacons. More speciﬁcally,
1) the number of radio sources is unknown,
2) the periods of radio transmission are short,
3) the signal source cannot be identiﬁed, and
4) radio sources transmit intermittently.
To deal with this challenging localization problem, we model
the radio source behaviors using a novel spatiotemporal proba-
bility occupancy grid (SPOG) that captures transient characteris-
tics of radio transmissions and tracks their posterior probability
distributions. We then propose an SPOG update algorithm that
incrementally updates the SPOG as radio transmissions are in-
tercepted. We also propose a Monte Carlo ridge walking motion
planning algorithm that enables the robot to efﬁciently traverse
high-probability regions to accelerate the convergence of the
posterior probability distributions of radio source locations. We
formally show that the time to ﬁnd a radio source is insensi-
tive to the number of radio sources, and hence, our algorithm
has great scalability. We have implemented the algorithms and
extensively tested them in comparison with two heuristics: a
random walk and a ﬁxed-route patrol. In experiments, the local-
ization time of our algorithms is consistently shorter than that
of the two heuristic methods.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We begin with a
review of related work in Section II. We present the system archi-
tecture and the problem deﬁnition in Section III. In Section IV,
we introduce the sensing model. Building on the outcome of
1552-3098/$31.00 © 2012 IEEE
SONG et al.: SIMULTANEOUS LOCALIZATION OF MULTIPLE UNKNOWN AND TRANSIENT RADIO SOURCES USING A MOBILE ROBOT 669
the sensing model, a robot motion planer is introduced in
Section V. The overall algorithms and localization time bounds
are presented in Section VI. We validate our model and al-
gorithm through experiments in Section VII. We conclude the
paper in Section VIII.
II. R ELATED WORK
Localization of unknown transient radio sources relates to
three research ﬁelds that includes radio frequency (RF)-based
localization, simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM),
and occupancy grid methods.
RF-based localization has witnessed fast development as
wireless communication technologies grow rapidly [1]–[5]. Sig-
nal strength, the time or the time difference of arrival [6], [7],
angle/bearing [6], and phase shift are commonly used in de-
riving the locations of signal sources using triangulation-based
approaches. Researchers in sensor and wireless network com-
munities have studied the RF-based localization problem ex-
tensively [8]–[14]. In their problem setup, sensors usually have
some prior knowledge about radio signals, such as source identi-
ﬁcation, packet length, network protocols/conﬁgurations, source
signal strength, and transmission rates. For example, recent de-
velopments of range-free localization use the prior knowledge
or part of it to estimate sensor locations by network connec-
tivity [15]–[18]. Nonparametric belief propagation [19] and the
sequence-based localization [20] methods are proposed. Recent
work also focuses on distributed solutions [21]–[24].
As a very relevant work, in [2], the authors use a network
of wireless access points to localize a mobile unit. This can be
viewed as a dual version of our problem. They use multiple static
listeners to localize a single mobile transmitter, while we try to
localize multiple static transmitters using a mobile listener. As
another closely related work, in [11], the authors try to localize
sensor-network nodes with a mobile beacon. The mobile beacon
and the sensor-network nodes are assumed to share the network
information. This type of work can be viewed as the localization
of “friendly” radio sources.
In robotics research, the SLAM is deﬁned as the process
of mapping the environment and localizing robot position at
the same time [25]–[27]. Although both SLAM and our ap-
proach are built on the Bayesian methods, the SLAM assumes
that the environment is static or close to static. Directly ap-
plying the SLAM methods to our problem is not appropriate
because networked radio sources create a highly dynamic envi-
ronment, where the signal-transmission patterns change quickly.
Although recent advance in the SLAM allows tracking of mov-
ing objects [28], the environment largely remains static.
Since the authors introduce occupancy grid maps as a prob-
abilistic sensor model in [29] and [30], the occupancy grid has
been proved to be an elegant representation of the sensor cov-
erage for mobile robot applications, such as localization and
mapping [25]. Recent work further improves occupancy grid
maps to incorporate multisensor fusion, an inverse sensor model,
and a forward sensor model. Occupancy grid-based methods
have recently been adapted to a variety of applications includ-
ing gas/odor source localization [31]. The existing occupancy
grid-based methods focus on using the spatial probabilistic rep-
resentation to describe sensing uncertainty and are not capable
of dealing with time-variant environments. In this study, we ex-
tend the occupancy grid methods into the temporal dimension
to deal with the dynamic characteristics of the transient radio
transmissions.
In [32], the authors also work on a similar problem that en-
ables a robot to search for multiple radio transmitters. In their
setup, the robot needs to ﬁnd all transmitters in an indoor envi-
ronment. Again, all transmitters are treated as continuous bea-
cons. The main focus of their approach is to provide a robust
gradient-based method to guide the robot to search for the trans-
mitters at the presence of complex and noise indoor signal ﬁelds.
The transient behaviors and signal correspondence are not con-
cerns of the approach.
We work on localization of unknown and transient radio
sources [33], [34]. In our previous works [35] and [36], we use
a single mobile robot that is equipped with a log-periodic dipole
array antenna to localize unknown networked sensor nodes. By
the usage of a particle-ﬁlter approach, we assume that the carrier
sensing multiple access (CSMA)-based protocol is used among
the networked radio sources. However, this method suffers from
the restrictive assumption on the CSMA protocol and scalabil-
ity issue of the particle-ﬁlter method. In this paper, we relax
the assumption and develop a protocol-independent localiza-
tion scheme that extends our previous conference paper [37] by
adding new convergence analysis and experimental results.
III. S YSTEM DESIGN AND PROBLEM DEFINTION
A. System Architecture
Fig. 2(a) illustrates the hybrid system architecture. The robot
knows its own position from the Global Positioning System or
other localization sensors and wants to search/localize the un-
known signal sources. From the robot perspective, the input is
the RSS readings from the directional antenna with the cor-
responding antenna orientations. The output of the system is
the planned trajectory for the robot to execute in the follow-
ing period. The entire system is built around the SPOG, which
tracks each cell’s probability of containing a radio source and
its transmission rate.
The system updates the SPOG whenever a radio transmission
is detected by the antenna. The antenna model outputs the pos-
terior probability distribution of the signal source as the inputs
to the SPOG. This update process is described by a continuous
time system. As a convention in this paper, we use t to denote
the continuous time.
On the other hand, the robot plans its motion periodically.
We denote the period length by τ0 , which is carefully chosen
to ensure that the robot has enough time to execute the planned
trajectory. At the beginning of each period, the robot plans its
trajectory based on the current SPOG. This decision-making
process is a discrete time system. We denote the discrete time
index variable by k ∈ N.
Fig. 2(b) illustrates the relationship between the continuous
time system and the discrete time system. Let tk ∈ R be the
exact time at the moment of the discrete time k. We deﬁne the
670 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 28, NO. 3, JUNE 2012
Fig. 2. (a) System diagram and (b) system timing.
kth period as the time interval between tk −1 and tk . Hence,
tk − tk −1 = τ0 for k> 1. We also deﬁne tk
j ∈ R as the exact
time when the jth radio transmission occurs in the kth period:
tk −1 ≤ tk
j <t k . The index variable j is reset to zero at the
beginning of each period.
B. Problem Setup
To formulate the localization problem, we make the following
assumptions.
1) Both the robot and radio sources are located in an obstacle-
free 2-D Euclidean space. Radio sources are stationary and
can be treated as points. In the later section, we will discuss
how to handle obstacles.
2) The network trafﬁc is light and each transmission is short.
This is the typical characteristic of a low-power sensor
network.
3) Each radio transmission is transmitted at the same power
level. This assumption can be relaxed if the robot is
equipped with an orthogonal antenna pair, which can pro-
vide directional information regardless of the transmission
power. For example, in recent works [38] and [39], the au-
thors show how to obtain distance to a radio source using
multiple antennas with different polarizations and/or sig-
nal ratios.
4) The radiation pattern of the radio sources is circular be-
cause most miniature wireless sensors are equipped with
omnidirectional antennas.
Because of the transient transmission and the fact that the
robot cannot associate a signal with its source, the robot cannot
simply triangulate the signal source. Since only one robot is
considered, the single robot perspective makes it more difﬁcult
than the cases where multiple robots or receivers are used.
C. Spatiotemporal Probability Occupancy Grid
We introduce the SPOG to track the posterior spatiotemporal
distributions of radio sources. To deﬁne the SPOG, we partition
the entire ﬁeld into equally sized square cells using a grid. Let
us deﬁne cell index set I := {1,...,n }, where n is the total
number of cells. Deﬁne i ∈ I as a cell index variable. The size
of each cell is determined by the RSS resolution of the antenna.
Inside each cell, we approximate radio source locations using
locations of the cell center. Deﬁne Ci as the event that cell i
contains at least one radio source and P(Ci) as the probability
that event Ci occurs. Hence, ∑
i∈I P(Ci) equals the number of
cells that contain radio sources if P(Ci) converges to a correct
value in the Monte Carlo localization process.P(Ci) tracks the
radio source location distribution and is the spatial component
of the SPOG. Localizing radio sources becomes ﬁnding cells
that ensure P(Ci) > 0.
At time tk
j , a transmission occurs. We deﬁne C1
i as the event
that cell i is the active radio source at time tk
j . Deﬁne C0
i as the
event that cell i is inactive at time tk
j . Hence
P(C0
i )+ P(C1
i )=1 and
∑
i∈I
P(C1
i )=1 (1)
because there is only one active transmission when the transmis-
sion is detected. We ignore the collision case because we take an
RSS measurement as soon as the transmission is initiated. The
probability of two or more transmissions that are initiated at the
exact same moment is negligible in a light-trafﬁc network. C1
i
is determined by the relative radio transmission rate and is the
temporal part of the SPOG. Unlike a regular occupancy grid, the
SPOG is unique because each cell is described by two types of
correlated random events: the spatial eventCi and the temporal
events C0
i and C1
i .
D. Problem Formulation
Fig. 2(a) suggests that the overall localization problem can be
divided into two subproblems: a sensing problem and a motion
planning problem. Let a random variable Zk
j ∈ N be the corre-
sponding RSS reading at time tk
j . Note that the RSS readings
are from a receiver with a discrete resolution. Deﬁne Z(Zk
j )
as the set of all RSS values sensed from the beginning of the
localization process to the moment whenZk
j is sensed. We also
deﬁne a set Z− (Zk
j ): = Z(Zk
j ) \{ Zk
j }, which is the set of all
RSS readings from the beginning of the localization process to
the moment right before Zk
j is sensed. Deﬁne P(Ci |Z(Zk
j ))
as the conditional probability that cell i contains at least one
radio source given the RSS setZ(Zk
j ). Following the same con-
vention, we deﬁne the conditional probabilitiesP(Ci |Z− (Zk
j )),
P(C1
i |Z(Zk
j )), and P(C1
i |Z− (Zk
j )). The sensing problem up-
dates the SPOG when a new transmission is detected.
Problem 1 (Sensing Problem): Given the current RSS
Zk
j , the previous RSS set Z− (Zk
j ), P(Ci |Z− (Zk
j )),
P(C1
i |Z− (Zk
j )), and the corresponding robot conﬁgurations,
compute P(Ci |Z(Zk
j )) and P(C1
i |Z(Zk
j )) for each cell i.
At the beginning of each period k, we plan the robot tra-
jectory. Let us deﬁne the robot position and orientation as
r(t)=[ x(t),y (t),θ(t)]T ∈ R2 × S, where S =( −π,π] is the
orientation angle set. Since the antenna is ﬁxed on the robot and
points to the robot forwarding direction,θ(t) is also the antenna
orientation. Deﬁne jmax as the index for the last transmission
sensed in periodk. Therefore, we can deﬁne the motion planning
problem for time k (or tk ) as follows.
SONG et al.: SIMULTANEOUS LOCALIZATION OF MULTIPLE UNKNOWN AND TRANSIENT RADIO SOURCES USING A MOBILE ROBOT 671
Fig. 3. HyperGain HG2415G parabolic directional antenna properties. (a)
Antenna photo and (b) calibrated radiation pattern.
Problem 2 (Radio Source Localization Motion
Planning): Given the current SPOG, which are the sets
{P(Ci |Z(Zk
jmax ))|i ∈ I} and {P(C1
i |Z(Zk
jmax ))|i ∈ I},p l a n
the robot trajectory {r(t)|tk ≤ t<t k+1 } that enables the robot
to quickly localize radio sources.
This overall approach is a Monte Carlo method with following
localization condition.
Deﬁnition 1 (Localization Condition): A radio source is be-
lieved to be located at cell i if P(Ci |Z(Zk
j )) ≥ pt for a given
probability threshold pt .
IV . SENSING MODELING
We address the sensing problem ﬁrst. The sensing problem
actually has two components: an antenna model and an SPOG
update process.
A. Antenna Model
The antenna model describes the property of the directional
antenna. As illustrated in Fig. 3, we use a HyperGain HG2415G
parabolic antenna in our system. We have introduced the antenna
model in [36]. For completeness, we brieﬂy reiterate the model
here.
Bearing and distance are the two most important variables
in an antenna model [40]. Let (xk
j ,y k
j ,θk
j ) be the robot con-
ﬁguration when the jth radio transmission in the kth period is
sensed. Let (xi,yi) be the location of cell center. Deﬁne dk
ij as
the distance from the robot to the center of the cell:
dk
ij =
√
(xk
j − xi)2 +( yk
j − yi)2. (2)
Let φk
ij be the bearing of the cell with respect to the robot:
φk
ij = atan2(yk
j − yi,xk
j − xi) − θk
j . (3)
By the assumption that the active radio source is located in cell
i, the expected RSS si of the directional antenna is given as
si = c · (dk
ij )−βϕ(φk
ij ) (4)
where c is a constant depending on radio transmission power,
and (dk
ij )−β is the signal decay function. The directivity of the
antenna is captured by the term ϕ(φk
ij ), which describes the
radiation pattern of the antenna. Note that dk
ij >d a , where da
is the length of the longest physical dimension of the antenna.
We obtain c = 63.09 and the decay factor β = 2.53 for our
antenna from the calibration process. Our β value conforms to
the widely accepted notion that the decay factor is between 2
and 4 [41].
Since our receiver uses dBm as an RSS unit, we have to take
a 10 log10 with respect to (4):
μi =1 0
(
log10 c − βlog10 dk
ij + log10 ϕ(φk
ij )
)
(5)
where μi is the expected RSS in units of dBm. From the antenna
theory and the results from the antenna calibration, we perform
curve ﬁtting to obtain the radiation pattern function as illustrated
in Fig. 3(b):
ϕ(φk
ij )=
⎧
⎪⎨
⎪⎩
1, if dk
ij ≤ da,
cos2 (4φk
ij ), if φk
ij ∈ [±20◦] and dk
ij >d a
cos2 (80◦), otherwise.
(6)
Note that the peak at the zero bearing in Fig. 3(b) is about
15 dB ·m higher than the average of nonpeak regions, which
conﬁrms antenna speciﬁcations.
Equations (5) and (6) describe the expected RSS given that
the radio transmission is from cell i. However, the RSS is not a
constant but a random variable because of the uncertainties in
radio transmissions, receiver resolution, and background noises.
Therefore, the mean value ofZk
j is μi . From the antenna calibra-
tion, we know that the distribution of Zk
j can be approximated
by a normal distribution with a density function of
gi(ζ) ≈ 1√
2πσ2 e− (ζ−μ i )2
2 σ 2 (7)
where the value of σ is 3.3 that is obtained from the antenna
calibration.
Let
Gi(z): =
∫ z
−∞
gi(ζ)dζ (8)
be the cumulative density function of the normal distribution,
where z is the RSS value.
Deﬁne P(Zk
j = z|C1
i ) as the conditional probability that the
RSS is an integer z given cell i contains at least an active radio
source. P(Zk
j = z|C1
i ) actually is the overall antenna model.
Since Zk
j can only take integer values, we have
P(Zk
j = z|C1
i )= Gi(z +0 .5) − Gi(z − 0.5)
=
∫ z+0 .5
z −0.5
gi(ζ)dζ (9)
as a function of z and μi . Because of high antenna resolution
and small integration intervals, (9) can be further approximated
as
P(Zk
j = z|C1
i ) ≈ αgi(z) (10)
672 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 28, NO. 3, JUNE 2012
where α = 1∑z max
z = z min
gi (z) is the normalization factor that en-
sures
zmax∑
z=zmin
P(Zk
j = z|C1
i )=1 .
Here, zmin and zmax are the minimum and the maximum RSS
that the antenna can sense, respectively. In fact, the antenna
sensitivity is tuned to satisfy the following condition:
zmax ≤ 10 log10 c := μmax (11)
so that we can fully utilize the sensitivity and resolution of the
antenna. Any RSS that is stronger than zmax is perceived as
zmax .
B. Determining Grid Resolution
The variance of reception σ in (7) can also be used to choose
an appropriate cell size. More cells mean more computation.
Indeed, later we will show that the overall algorithm is O(n2).
On the other hand, a sparse grid would lead to low localization
resolution. We use a2σ-separation rule as follows. Let celli and
cell s be two adjacent cells. If a radio source that is located at
cell i emits a signal, then the expected RSS values from robots
that are located at cellsi and s would beμi and μs , respectively.
In addition, μi = μmax because of the signal saturation. The
2σ-separation rule is that we choose the cell size such that
μi − μs =2 σ. (12)
Deﬁne dis the distance between adjacent centers of cells i and
s. From (5) and (12), we have
dis =1 0
1
β (0.2σ+log 10 cos 2 (80 ◦)) . (13)
C. Updating the SPOG
When a radio transmission with an RSS level of z is sensed,
we are interested in P(Ci |Zk
j = z), which is the conditional
probability that cell i contains at least one radio source given
the RSS is z. According to (1), we have
P(Ci |Zk
j = z)= P(Ci,C 1
i |Zk
j = z)+ P(Ci,C 0
i |Zk
j = z).
Since event C1
i implies event Ci , the joint event (Ci,C 1
i ) is the
same as C1
i . Hence,
P(Ci |Zk
j = z)= P(C1
i |Zk
j = z)+ P(Ci,C 0
i |Zk
j = z).
(14)
According to Bayes’ theorem
P(C1
i |Zk
j = z)= P(Zk
j = z|C1
i )P(C1
i )∑
i∈I P(Zk
j = z|C1
i )P(C1
i ). (15)
Equation (15) describes the posterior conditional distribution
of the active radio source given the RSS is z. If we assume that
the radio transmission is equally likely to be initiated by any
cell in the grid, which means that P(C1
i ) is the same across all
cells, then the posterior condition distribution actually captures
the radiation pattern (see Fig. 4).
The second term P(Ci,C 0
i |Zk
j = z) in (14) is the joint con-
ditional probability that there is at least one radio source in cell
Fig. 4. Distribution of P (C1
i |Zk
j = z) over a 50 × 50 grid for the directional
antenna given that P (C1
i ) is the same across all cells.
i and none of the radio sources in celli transmits given the RSS
is z. Joint event (Ci,C 0
i ) implies the following information.
1) Since none of radio sources in cell i is transmitting, the
condition Zk
j = z cannot provide additional information
for event Ci , which implies P(Ci |Zk
j = z)= P(Ci).
2) There must be one active cell s, s ∈ I and s ̸= i.
3) Joint conditional event (Ci,C 0
i |Zk
j = z) is equivalent
to the union of the collection of events {(Ci,C 1
s |Zk
j =
z),s ̸= i, s ∈ I} because of no collision.
4) Events Ci and C1
s are independent.
Therefore, we can obtain
P(Ci,C 0
i |Zk
j = z)= P(Ci)
∑
s̸=i,s ∈I
P(C1
s |Zk
j = z). (16)
Note that P(C1
s |Zk
j = z) can be computed using (15). By the
substitution of (15) and (16) into (14), we obtain
P(Ci |Zk
j = z)
=
(
P(Zk
j = z|C1
i )P(C1
i )
+P(Ci)∑
s̸=i,s ∈I P(Zk
j = z|C1
s )P(C1
s )
)
∑
s∈I P(Zk
j = z|C1s )P(C1s ) . (17)
Unfortunately, (15) and (17) cannot be directly used in the sys-
tem because P(Ci) and P(C1
i ) are not available. We have to
rely on the conditional versions of P(Ci) and P(C1
i ) that build
on the observation Z− (Zk
j ). We can derive the following from
(15) by adding Z− (Zk
j ) as the condition:
P(C1
i |{Zk
j = z}∪ Z− (Zk
j ))
= P(Zk
j = z|C1
i ,Z− (Zk
j ))P(C1
i |Z− (Zk
j ))∑
s∈I P(Zk
j = z|C1s ,Z− (Zk
j ))P(C1s |Z− (Zk
j )). (18)
Since the conditional event Zk
j = z is independent of the
previous RSS values Z− (Zk
j ) given C1
i , we know P(Zk
j =
z|C1
i ,Z− (Zk
j )) = P(Zk
j = z|C1
i ). According to the deﬁnition,
SONG et al.: SIMULTANEOUS LOCALIZATION OF MULTIPLE UNKNOWN AND TRANSIENT RADIO SOURCES USING A MOBILE ROBOT 673
{Zk
j = z}∪ Z− (Zk
j )= Z(Zk
j ). Equation (18) can be rewritten
as
P(C1
i |Z(Zk
j )) = P(Zk
j = z|C1
i )P(C1
i |Z− (Zk
j ))∑
s∈I P(Zk
j = z|C1s )P(C1s |Z− (Zk
j )).
(19)
Similarly, from (17), we can derive the following:
P(Ci |Z(Zk
j ))
=
⎛
⎝
P(Zk
j = z|C1
i )P(C1
i |Z− (Zk
j ))
+P(Ci |Z− (Zk
j ))
×∑
s̸=i,s ∈I P(Zk
j = z|C1
s )P(C1
s |Z− (Zk
j ))
⎞
⎠
∑
s∈I P(Zk
j = z|C1s )P(C1s |Z− (Zk
j )) . (20)
Equations (19) and (20) provide a recursive formulation for
updating the SPOG when a new radio transmission is sensed.
V. R OBOT MOTION PLANNING
We threshold P(Ci |Z(Zk
j )) to determine if cell i con-
tains at least a radio source (see Deﬁnition 1). The rate that
P(Ci |Z(Zk
j )) → 1 for cells that contain radio sources deter-
mines localization speed and accuracy. Equations (19) and (20)
show that P(Ci |Z(Zk
j )) largely depends the antenna model
P(Zk
j = z|C1
i )= αgi(z), which actually is a function of robot
conﬁgurations. We can design robot conﬁgurations to increase
P(Ci |Z(Zk
j )), which will increase convergence speed. A good
motion planner should warrant a good convergence speed.
Recall that (20) predicts P(Ci |Z(Zk
j )) at time k.A tt h e
moment before time k, deﬁne ws := P(C1
s |Z− (Zk
j )),s ∈ I,
which are constants. To simplify the notation, we deﬁne ξk =
P(Ci |Z(Zk
j )) and ξk −1 = P(Ci |Z− (Zk
j )). Then, (20) can be
rewritten as
ξk = ξk −1 + (1 − ξk −1)wi∑
s ∈I gs (z)ws
gi (z)
. (21)
We are interested in choosing a robot conﬁgura-
tion (xk
j ,y k
j ,θk
j ) to maximize the posterior probability
P(Ci |Z(Zk
j )). Since ws,s ∈ I, and ξk −1 are constants at the
moment prior to time k, (21) implies that the maximization of
the posterior probability is
(xk ∗
j ,y k ∗
j ,θk ∗
j ) = arg max(xk
j ,y k
j ,θk
j )ξk
= arg min(xk
j ,y k
j ,θk
j )
∑
s∈I gs(z)ws
gi(z) (22)
= arg min(xk
j ,y k
j ,θk
j )
∑
s∈I
wsrsi (z) (23)
where
rsi (z)= gs(z)
gi(z) = e− 1
2 σ 2 [(z −μs )2 −(z −μi )2 ] (24)
(xk ∗
j ,y k ∗
j ,θk ∗
j ) is the optimal robot conﬁguration, and
μs =1 0
(
log10 C − βlog10 dk
sj + log10 ϕ(φk
sj )
)
∀s ∈ I.
(25)
Fig. 5. (a) Example of P (Ci |Z(Zk
j )) distribution and (b) radio source loca-
tions, a sample level set L(0.3), and ridges over a 50 × 50 grid for the case.
The radio source locations are shown with black dots. The level set is bounded
inside the blue solid lines. The red dashed lines denote the corresponding ridges
for the level set components.
To simplify the notation, let us deﬁneri := ∑
s∈I wsrsi (z).R e -
call thatws = P(C1
s |Z− (Zk
j )),s ∈ I. From statistics [42], [43],
we know that ri is the likelihood ratio for two candidate dis-
tributions: the univariate Gaussian distribution that is repre-
sented by gi(z) and the Gaussian mixture that is represented
by ∑
s∈I wsgs(z). Let us use the Gaussian mixture as H0 hy-
pothesis and the univariate Gaussian as H1 hypothesis for the
likelihood ratio test of the unknown distribution of the random
noise in z. Minimizing ri actually minimizes the likelihood
that noise in z is from the Gaussian mixture as opposed to the
univariate Gaussian distribution. This is very intuitive for our
problem.
The optimization problem in (23) is not directly solvable be-
cause z is the RSS of the future reception at timek and ri is not
available. Therefore, to ﬁnd the global optimal (xk ∗
j ,y k ∗
j ,θk ∗
j )
for the nonlinear optimization problem is impractical. Actually,
a robust local optimal solution would be a good candidate so-
lution because the solution can also effectively accelerate the
posterior probability convergence for ξk . Deﬁning xk
j =[ xk
j
yk
j
],
and xi =[ xi
yi
], we have the following lemma with its proof in
the Appendix.
Lemma 1: If the robot is located at the center of the cell i at
time k, xk
j = xi , then the likelihood ratiori is located at a local
minima regardless of future reception z.
Remark 1: Note that Lemma 1 and its proof do not specify
robot orientation θk
j . This is because of the fact that the RSS
receiver is saturated when xk
j → xi according to (6). Hence,
ϕ =1 is constant in (25), which means that the θk
j value is
irrelevant.
Lemma 1 suggests that the principle of the motion planning
is to drive the robot into the cells with the high P(Ci |Z(Zk
j ))
values. This principle inspires us to develop a ridge walking
algorithm (RW A) for the robot motion planning.
Fig. 5(a) illustrates an example of the distribution of
P(Ci |Z(Zk
j )) over a 50 × 50 grid. The actual radio source po-
sitions are shown as black dots in Fig. 5(b).P(Ci |Z(Zk
j )) value
is much larger in the area adjacent to radio sources than that of
other areas. To study the spatial distribution of P(Ci |Z(Zk
j )),
674 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 28, NO. 3, JUNE 2012
we introduce level set L(p), p ∈ (0,1] as follows:
L(p)= {i|P(Ci |Z(Zk
j )) ≥ p, i ∈ I}. (26)
Let us envision that a plane parallel to the ground plane inter-
sects the mountain-like P(Ci |Z(Zk
j )) distribution at height p
in Fig. 5(a). The intersection generates L(p) that contains all
cells with P(Ci |Z(Zk
j )) above the plane. Fig. 5(b) illustrates
the level set L(0.3) for the example shown in Fig. 5(a).
Fig. 5(b) also shows that L(p) usually consists of several
disconnected components. Deﬁne lmax as the total number of
the disconnected components and Ll as the lth component,
l =1 ,...,l max . Therefore,L(p)= L1 ∪ L2 ∪···∪ Llmax , and
Ll ∩ Lm = ∅, where m ̸= l and m =1 ,2,...,l max .F o rt h elth
component, we deﬁne its ridge Rl as the line segment deﬁned
by points (x′,y ′) and (x′′,y ′′) on Ll :
Rl = {(x, y)|x =( 1 − α)x′ + αx′′
y =( 1 − α)y′ + αy′′,α ∈ [0,1]} (27)
where points (x′,y ′) and (x′′,y ′′) are the two points on Ll such
that the distance between (x′,y ′) and (x′′,y ′′) is the maximum.
If the robot walks on the ridge, the probability that the robot
is close to a potential radio source is high. Because of the walk-
ing direction, the antenna always points along the ridge, which
ensures the most sensitive reception region of the antenna to
overlap with thelth component. In the RW A, there are two types
of robot motion: on-ridge movements and off-ridge movements.
Since the on-ridge movement is the effective movement for the
localization purpose, it is desirable for the robot to allocate its
time to on-ridge movements as much as possible. The off-ridge
movement denotes the travel in-between ridges for the robot.
Since we have a ﬁxed time period, we set the robot to travel at
its fastest speed along the shortest path for off-ridge movements
to save time for on-ridge movements.
We treat the end point of each on-ridge segment as a vertex.
We deﬁne edges as the line segments connecting different ver-
tices on the 2-D plane. With a vertex set V , an edge set E, and
a graph G(V,E ), to ﬁnd the shortest path is an instance of the
traveling salesman problem (TSP). The only difference is that
edges corresponding to on-ridge movements must be included
in the solution. We can modify the original TSP by treating each
on-ridge edge and its two end points as a super vertex. Then,
solving the TSP provides an efﬁcient trajectory for the robot.
Deﬁne vmax as the maximum velocity that the robot can travel.
The time available for on-ridge movements tON is
tON = τ0 − dOFF /vmax (28)
where dOFF is the total length of off-ridge edges. We allocate
tON to each ridge proportional to the probability that the cor-
responding component contains a radio source. For component
l, we deﬁne the time the robot spend on the ridge Rl as τl .
Therefore
τl =
∑
i∈Ll P(Ci |Z(Zk
j ))∑
i∈L(p) P(Ci |Z(Zk
j ))tON . (29)
With τl and the length of each ridge, it is trivial to ﬁnd the robot
velocity for the ridge. If the low-cost robot cannot accurately
control its speed, then we cannot execute the precise time allo-
cation in (29). If so, we can simply set the robot to its maximum
speed for off-ridge movements and minimum speed for on-ridge
movements.
VI. A LGORITHMS
A. Algorithm Pseudo Code and Complexity
To summarize our analysis, we present two algorithms includ-
ing an SPOG update algorithm and the RW A. Corresponding to
the sensing problem in Section III-D, the SPOG update algo-
rithm (i.e., Algorithm 1) runs when a radio signal is detected.
Deﬁne set C∗ as the set of cells that contain radio sources with
the initial value C∗ = ∅. Recall that pt is the probability thresh-
old for ﬁnding the radio source. The robot reports the cells that
satisfy P(Ci |Z(Zk
j )) >p t as the cells that contain at least one
radio source.
Recall that n is the total number of cells. It is clear that the
complexity of Algorithm 1 is O(n2). The initial value settings
are P(Ci |Z(Z0
0 )) = 0 and P(C1
i |Z(Z0
0 )) = 1/n.
The RW A runs everyτ0 time. As illustrated in Algorithm 2,
the robot performs random walking until setL(p) ̸= ∅at the ini-
tialization stage. Then, the robot switches into the normal ridge
walking mode. The robot stops when no additional radio source
has been found in kmax consecutive periods, where kmax is a
preset iteration number. For the Euclidean TSP, we can also use
approximation approaches, such as the minimum spanning tree
(MST) approximation [44, p. 969]. If so, the overall complexity
can be reduced to O(n + l2
max ).
B. Localization Time
An important question that remains to be answered is how
long does it take for the RW A to ﬁnd a radio source. We need
to ﬁnd the upper bound of the searching/localization time. Let
Ts denote the searching time. Obviously, Ts is related to how
often the radio source transmits. To facilitate our analysis, let us
assume that the radio source i transmits according to a Poisson
process with a rate of λi . Since we are looking for the upper
SONG et al.: SIMULTANEOUS LOCALIZATION OF MULTIPLE UNKNOWN AND TRANSIENT RADIO SOURCES USING A MOBILE ROBOT 675
bound of Ts , we also tighten the convergence condition by in-
creasing the probability threshold pt in Deﬁnition 1. Threshold
pt is set high so that the robot must receive a saturated signal
when considering radio source i found. It means that the robot
must receive the transmission within the distance of da of the
radio source. This deﬁnesa sensing circlewith its center located
at the radio source i and a radius of da .
Without loss of generality, we assume the ﬁeld of localization
as a disk with a radius of 1. Deﬁne TTSP to be the amount of
time for the robot to ﬁnish a TSP tour in the RW A. LetτIN and
τOUT be portions of the tour within and outside distance of da
of radio source i, respectively. Hence
TTSP = τIN + τOUT . (30)
We have the following theorem.
Theorem 1: The expected searching time E(Ts) of radio
source i has the following upper bound:
E(Ts) ≤ τ0
1 − e−λi τ0
+ 1
λi
+ 4
√
3
vavg
[ 1
2 + E
( e−λi τIN
1 − e−λi τIN
)]
(31)
wherevavg is the average traveling speed of the robot and deﬁned
in (40).
Proof: From [34, Th. 1], we know that the expected time to
search for a transient signal source is
E(Ts)= E(D)+ 1
λi
+ E
(
τOUT
e−λi τIN
1 − e−λi τIN
)
(32)
whereD is the amount of time from the beginning to the moment
that the robot is within the distance da of the radio source i
during the repetitive TSP tours. It is clear that D is a random
variable. From Algorithm 2, the robot performs random walk
in the ﬁrst period to initialize the SPOG. The expect value of
D can be obtained by conditioning on the event Ai that radio
source i has at least one transmission during the initial τ0 time.
If Ai is true, then the TSP tour planned at the end of ﬁrst period
would come across the sensing circle of the radio sourcei.I f Ai
is not true, the system returns to the same initial state because
the chance that the next TSP tour will come across the sensing
circle is negligible. Hence, we have
E(D|Ai)= τ0 + E(TTSP )/2 (33)
E(D| ¯Ai) ≈ τ0 + E(D). (34)
From the property of a Poisson process, we know
P( ¯Ai)= e−λi τ0 and P(Ai)=1 − e−λi τ0 . (35)
Combining (35) with (33) and (34), we have
E(D)= E(D|Ai)P(Ai)+ E(D| ¯Ai)P( ¯Ai)
= τ0
1 − e−λi τ0
+ E(TTSP )/2. (36)
In addition, sinceτIN ≪ τOUT and τIN is independent ofTTSP ,
the last term of (32) can be approximated as
E
(
τOUT
e−λi τIN
1 − e−λi τIN
)
≈ E(TTSP )E
(
e−λi τIN
1 − e−λi τIN
)
.
(37)
If the TSP tour straightly crosses the sensing circle with a speed
of v, we have shown how to computeE( e−λi τIN
1−e−λi τIN
) in [34]:
E
(
e−λi τIN
1 − e−λi τIN
)
=
∫ π/2
0
1
e
2 λi d a sin θ
v − 1
sin θdθ. (38)
When the ﬁeld is large, the TSP tour consists of long and straight
line segments. Equation (38) is a good approximation for general
E( e−λi τIN
1−e−λi τIN
). By the substitution of (36) and (37) into (32), we
have
E(Ts)= τ0
1 − e−λi τ0
+ 1
λi
+ E(TTSP )
×
[
1
2 + E
(
e−λi τIN
1 − e−λi τIN
)]
. (39)
Deﬁne LTSP as the length of the TSP tour and vavg as the
average speed during the tour that satisﬁes
E(TTSP )= E(LTSP )/vavg . (40)
Deﬁne LMST as the summation of MST edges for the vertices
in the TSP tour. From [44], we know thatLTSP ≤ 2LMST since
triangle inequalities are satisﬁed for the Euclidean TSP. Deﬁne
E as the edge index set for the MST and el as the lth edge in E.
From its deﬁnition, we know that LMST = ∑
l∈E |el | and that
LMST =
√
( ∑
l∈E
|el |
) 2
≤
√
2
∑
l∈E
|el |2. (41)
Since all vertices are located inside a unit disk and distances are
Euclidean, from [45, Th. 1], we have
∑
l∈E
|el |2 ≤ 6 (42)
regardless of the number of vertices in the graph. Combining
(40)–(42), we have
E(TTSP ) ≤ 4
√
3/vavg . (43)
Equation (31) is proved by substituting (43) into (39). ■
676 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 28, NO. 3, JUNE 2012
Remark 2: An important result that is given by Theorem 1 is
the fact that entries in (31) are not sensitive to the number of
radio sources. This means that our RW A has excellent scalability
when the number of radio sources increases.
C. Extensions
Increasing localization accuracy, handling of uneven trans-
mission rates, and dealing with obstacles in the searching region
are the three important extensions for application purposes.
Increasing localization accuracy: We discretize the search-
ing space, and the localization accuracy is inherently limited by
grid resolution. If the localization accuracy cannot satisfy ap-
plication requirement, we can run a postprocessing algorithm to
increase the accuracy. Once a cell that contains a radio source is
identiﬁed, we can verify all RSSs to identify transmissions that
are initiated by the source based on distances between the cell
center and the robot positions when transmissions occurred. We
can identify a group of transmissions that are within a preset dis-
tance threshold since the robot has less range ambiguity when
it moves closer to the source. Based on the transmissions, we
can estimate the source location using the maximum likelihood
estimator by minimizing the Mahalanobis distance. The process
can provide both mean and variance of the source position. Since
the method is a standard approach [46], we omit the details. In
fact, when the cell is identiﬁed, the problem can be reduced to
the regular localization problem with multiple measurements.
Handling of uneven transmission rates:The RW A tracks high-
probability regions by patrolling. This is an efﬁcient approach
when the transmission rates of radio sources are close to each
other. If a few nodes transmit signiﬁcantly more frequently than
others, their residing cells can be quickly identiﬁed. This often
happens if the sensor network employs some nodes as routers.
In such cases, repeatedly visiting the cells is inefﬁcient, and the
RW A needs to remove ridges corresponding to the identiﬁed
nodes before solving the TSP such that the robot can focus on
searching for the remaining nodes.
Dealing with obstacles in the searching region: In the pres-
ence of obstacles, the SPOG framework can be easily adapted by
marking obstacle-occupied cells as nontraversable. For motion
planning, we can still use the idea of RW A but connecting the
ridges in the presence of obstacle is different because simple line
connections may not work. This can be addressed by using the
established techniques in motion planning, such as sampling- or
rapid-exploring random tree (RRT)-based approaches [47]. De-
pending upon the methods that are used, the path length, which
is the most important factor that determines the convergence
speed, may vary, and the ﬁnal searching time analysis should
reﬂect the complexity of obstacles.
VII. E XPERIMENTS
We have implemented the algorithms using Microsoft Visual
C++ .NET 2005 with OpenGL on a PC desktop with an In-
tel 2.13-GHz Core 2 Duo CPU and 2-GB RAM. The machine
runs Microsoft Windows XP. The algorithms are tested in the
hardware-driven simulation and physical experiments. The an-
tenna on the robot is HyperGainT Model HG2415G that is a
2.4-GHz 15-dBi reﬂector grid antenna. The radio sources are
Zigbee nodes, which are XBeeT with ZigBeeT/802.15.4 OEM
RF Modules by MaxStream, Inc. The antenna is calibrated ﬁrst
with the radio sources. The calibration is conducted at 328 con-
ﬁgurations and 6560 readings have been collected. The cali-
brated antenna model is represented as the coefﬁcients in (5)
and σ in (7).
A. Simulation
We use the data from the real hardware to drive the simulation
experiments here.
The grid is a square with 50 × 50 cells. Each grid cell has a
size of 5.08× 5.08 cm2 . Each radio source generates radio trans-
mission signals according to an independently and identically
distributed Poisson process with a rate of λ=0 .012 packets
per second. The threshold pt =0 .8 and the level set parameter
p = 6
n
∑
i P(Ci |Z(Zk
j )), where the constant 6 is determined by
many experimental trials. During each trial of the simulation,
we randomly generate radio source locations in the 50× 50 grid.
The ﬁrst experiment we conducted is to study how fast the
RW A can localize all radio sources under differentτ0 settings.
This determines how often we should run the RW A. Fig. 6(a)
shows the test results. We change the radio source number from
2 to 10 during the simulation. Each point in Fig. 6(a) is an
average of 10 trials. It is interesting that the RW A is at its best
performance when τ0 = 800 s, regardless of the radio source
number. This means that the robot needs to listen to each radio
for an expected value of800λ=9 .6 times before repeating the
algorithm.
Fig. 6(b) illustrates how P(Ci |Z(Zk
j )) converges at the ra-
dio source for a trial with six radio sources. It is clear that
P(Ci |Z(Zk
j )) tends monotonically toward 1. This is what we
expect to see: P(Ci |Z(Zk
j )) → 1 for cells containing radio
sources.
We also compare our algorithms to two intuitive heuristics,
namely, a random walk and a ﬁxed-route patrol. The random
walk is chosen because it is considered as the most conservative
approach. According to [34], a 2-D lattice-based random walk
can cover the entire ﬁeld over a long run. Hence, it does not have
a blind spot. The ﬁxed-route patrol traverses the ﬁeld using a pre-
deﬁned route that scans all cells. It warrants equal coverage but
might not visit cells with radio sources frequent enough because
of the route length. We increase the radio source number from 2
to 10 to observe the performance of each method. For each trial,
we test all three methods. We repeat for 10 trials for each radio
source number and compute the average time required for the
localization of all radio sources. Fig. 6(c) illustrates comparison
results. It is clear that the RW A signiﬁcantly outperforms the
two heuristics in terms of localization time. The result can be
explained that the robot motion for the two heuristics does not
consider sensor location distribution and, hence, cannot achieve
good performance.
B. Physical Experiments
We test both SPOG update and RW A in physical experiments.
The physical experiment is conducted in a 10 × 10 m2 ﬁeld,
SONG et al.: SIMULTANEOUS LOCALIZATION OF MULTIPLE UNKNOWN AND TRANSIENT RADIO SOURCES USING A MOBILE ROBOT 677
Fig. 6. Simulation results. (a) RW A performance versus τ0 , (b) convergence of P (Ci |Z(Zk
j )) at radio source locations for a six-radio source case, and (c)
localization time comparison among the RW A, the random walk, and the ﬁxed-route patrol.
Fig. 7. Physical experiment hardware and results. (a) Robot. (b) RF source is XBeeT with ZigBeeT/802.15.4 OEM RF Modules by MaxStream, Inc. (c) Sample
robot trajectory. (d) Convergence ofP (Ci |Z(Zk
j )) for cells containing radio sources.
which is evenly divided into 50 × 50 cells. Each cell has a side
length of 20 cm. The threshold for the SPOG convergence is
pt =0 .7.
The robot is custom made in our laboratory [see Fig. 7(a)].
The robot measures 50× 47× 50 cm3 in size. The robot has two
front drive wheels and one rear cast wheel and uses a typical dif-
ferential driving structure. The robot has a maximum traveling
speed vmax of 40 cm/s. The four color patches on the top of the
robot are used for obtaining robot location and orientation from
an overhead camera that is mounted at a height of a three-story
building. The top sliver ring above the color patches contains
white LEDs that are used to illuminate the color patches at night
for night experiments. The vision-based localization system can
provide the robot with location at an accuracy of±5 cm in each
dimension of position and orientation at ±3.5◦ at a frame rate
of 11 frames/s.
Fig. 7(b) illustrates the aforementioned radio sources. We use
three such radio sources in the experiment. Each of them is pro-
grammed with a Poisson transmission rate of 0.05 packets/s. We
set τ0 = 160 s in the experiments. Fig. 7(c) illustrates the actual
robot trajectory, actual location of the three radio sources, and
the estimated locations of the radio sources. It is clear that the
robot has successfully found all three radio sources with rea-
sonable accuracy. The on-ridge and off-ridge parts of the robot
trajectory are represented by red solid lines and blue dashed
lines, respectively. The fact that most of on-ridge movements
are close to the radio sources indicates that the RW A is effective.
Fig. 7(d) illustrates how P(Ci |Z(Zk
j )) converges at the
three radio source cells during the physical experiment. Sim-
ilar to what we have seen in simulation results in Fig. 6(b),
P(Ci |Z(Zk
j )) of these cells tends toward 1. The cell represented
by the blue dashed line has the slowest growing rate because
the corresponding radio source transmits the fewest number of
signals.
VIII. C ONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
System and algorithm developments that enable a mobile
robot to localize multiple unknown transient radio sources have
been reported. By the employment of a Monte Carlo approach,
the radio transmission activities using an SPOG have been mod-
eled and an SPOG update algorithm to track the radio source
location and transmission rates has been proposed. Based on
the SPOG, an RW A for robot motion planning by accelerating
the SPOG convergence rate has been developed. For the n-cell
grid, the SPOG update algorithm runs in O(n2) time and the
RW A runs inO(n + l2
max ) time. The fact that the time to ﬁnd
a radio source is insensitive to the number of radio sources,
and hence, our algorithm has great scalability has been formally
proved. The algorithm using simulation with the data from the
678 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 28, NO. 3, JUNE 2012
real hardware and a physical experiment has been tested. In
the simulation experiment, algorithms with a random walk and
a ﬁxed-route patrol heuristics have been compared. Our algo-
rithms showed a consistently faster localization speed than that
of the two heuristics. In the physical experiment, the SPOG and
RW A have been tested in the setup that directs the mobile robot
to search for three radio sources. The physical experiment re-
sults showed that the system and algorithm development were
successful.
In the future, we are interested in extending SPOG and RW A
to design a decentralized multiple-robot localization scheme.
Tracking moving radio sources is another interesting extension
of the proposed framework. We will consider various kinody-
namic and energy constraints imposed by robots. More efﬁ-
cient motion planning strategies considering obstacles in the
environment and optimal velocity proﬁle will be explored for
these problems. We will also apply the algorithms to human
tracking in search and rescue and animal tracking in the nature
environment.
APPENDIX
PROOF OF LEMMA 1
From (23), each entry in the Jacobian of ri with respect to
μs , s ∈ I, can be computed as follows:
∂ri
∂μs
=
{ ws
σ2 (z − μs)rsi (z), if s ̸= i
− ∑
a∈I,a ̸=i
wa
σ2 (z − μi)rai (z), if s = i (44)
where a ∈ I is the new index variable. By the use of the chain
rule, we obtain
∂ri
∂xk
j
=
∑
s∈I
∂ri
∂μs
∂μs
∂xk
j
= −
∑
s∈I,s ̸=i
ws
σ2 rsi (z)(μi − μs)∂(μi − μs)
∂xk
j
. (45)
From (5), we know
μi − μs =1 0βlog10
dk
sj
dk
ij
+ 10 log10
ϕ(φk
ij )
ϕ(φk
sj ). (46)
By the substitution of (2) into the previous equations, we can
compute its partial derivative with respect tox as follows:
∂(μi − μs)
∂xk
j
=1 0β
(
xk
j − xs
(dk
sj )2 − xk
j − xi
(dk
ij )2
)
. (47)
Combining (45) and (47), we have
∂ri
∂xk
j
= −10β
∑
s∈I,s ̸=i
ws
σ2 rsi (z)(μi − μs)
(
xk
j − xs
(dk
sj )2 − xk
j − xi
(dk
ij )2
)
.
(48)
Similarly, we obtain
∂ri
∂yk
j
= −10β
∑
s∈I,s ̸=i
ws
σ2 rsi (z)(μi − μs)
(
yk
j − ys
(dk
sj )2 − yk
j − yi
(dk
ij )2
)
.
(49)
Deﬁning ∇rT =[ ∂ri
∂xk
j
, ∂ri
∂yk
j
], we can verify the ﬁrst-order opti-
mality condition by computing ∇rT (xk
j − xi) at the neighbor-
hood of (xk
j = xi):
∇rT (xk
j − xi)
= −10β
∑
s∈I,s ̸=i
ws
σ2 rsi (z)(μi − μs) (50)
×
{(
xk
j − xs
(dk
sj )2 − xk
j − xi
(dk
ij )2
)
(xk
j − xi)
+
(
yk
j − ys
(dk
sj )2 − yk
j − yi
(dk
ij )2
)
(yk
j − yi)
}
≈− 10β
∑
s∈I,s ̸=i
ws
σ2 rsi (z)(μi − μs)
×
{
− (xk
j − xi)2 +( yk
j − yi)2
(dk
ij )2
}
. (51)
Note that the approximation from (50) to (51) is based on
the fact that
⏐⏐⏐
xk
j −xs
(dk
sj )2
⏐⏐⏐ ≪
⏐⏐⏐
xk
j −xi
(dk
ij )2
⏐⏐⏐ and
⏐⏐⏐
yk
j −ys
(dk
sj )2
⏐⏐⏐ ≪
⏐⏐⏐
yk
j −yi
(dk
ij )2
⏐⏐⏐ when
xk
j → xi . From (51), we know
lim
xk
j → xi
∇rT (xk
j − xi)=1 0 β
∑
s∈I,s ̸=i
ws
σ2 rsi (z)(μi − μs) ≥ 0.
(52)
Therefore,xk
j = xi is a local minima (see [48]) regardless of the
z value. This proof relies on the limiting format of the ﬁrst-order
sufﬁcient condition instead of a regular format because of the
degeneracy in ratio computation. ■
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank K. Goldberg, R. V olz, E. Frew,
and J. Xiao for their insightful discussions. The authors would
also like to thank Q. Hu and Z. Goodwin for their contributions
to the earlier implementation and experiments and Y . Xu, W. Li,
H. Li, Y . Lu, and H. Ge for their inputs and contributions to the
Networked Robots Laboratory, Texas A&M University.
REFERENCES
[1] P. Bahl and V . N. Padmanabhan, “RADAR: An in-building RF-based user
location and tracking system,” inProc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Commun.,
2000, pp. 775–784.
[2] J. Letchner, D. Fox, and A. LaMarce, “Large-scale localization from wire-
less signal strength,” in Proc. Nat. Conf. Artif. Intell., 2005, pp. 15–20.
[3] N. Malhotra, M. Krasniewski, C. Yang, S. Bagchi, and W. Chappell,
“Location estimation in ad hoc networks with directional antennas,” in
Proc. 25th IEEE Int. Conf. Distrib. Comput. Syst . Washington, DC:
IEEE Computer Society, 2005, pp. 633–642.
[4] M. Youssef, A. Agrawala, and U. Shankar, “Wlan location determination
via clustering and probability distributions,” in Proc. IEEE Pervasive
Comput. Commun., 2003, p. 143.
[5] G. Mao, B. Fidan, and B. Anderson, “Wireless sensor network localization
techniques,” Comput. Netw., vol. 51, no. 7, pp. 2529–2553, 2007.
[6] A. Savvides, C. Han, and M. B. Strivastava, “Dynamic ﬁne-grained lo-
calization in ad-hoc networks of sensors,” in Proc. ACM SIGMOBILE ,
Rome, Italy, Jul. 2001, pp. 166–179.
SONG et al.: SIMULTANEOUS LOCALIZATION OF MULTIPLE UNKNOWN AND TRANSIENT RADIO SOURCES USING A MOBILE ROBOT 679
[7] B. H. Wellenhoff, H. Lichtenegger, and J. Collins, Global Positioning
System: Theory and Practice. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1997.
[8] N. Bulusu, J. Heidemann, and D. Estrin, “GPS-less low cost outdoor
localization for very small devices,” IEEE Pers. Commun. Mag.,v o l .7 ,
no. 5, pp. 28–34, Oct. 2000.
[9] X. Ji and H. Zha, “Sensor positioning in wireless ad-hoc sensor networks
using multidimensional scaling,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Com-
mun., 2004, pp. 2562–2661.
[10] K. Lorincz and M. Welsh, “Motetrack: A robust, decentralized approach
to RF-based location tracking,” in Proc. Int. Workshop Location Context-
Awareness Pervasive,, 2005, pp. 63–82.
[11] M. Sichitiu and V . Ramadurai, “Localization of wireless sensor networks
with a mobile beacon,” in Proc. 1st IEEE Int. Conf. Mobile Ad hoc Sens.
Syst., 2004, pp. 174–183.
[12] N. Bulusu, V . Bychkovskiy, D. Estrin, and J. Heidemann. (2002,
Oct.). Scalable, ad hoc deployable rf-based localization. in Grace
Hopper Celebration of Women in Computing Conf. 2002, Vancou-
ver, BC, Canada. Los Angeles, CA: UCLA Press. [Online]. Avail-
able:http://www.cs.ucla.edu/bulusu/papers/Bulusu02a.html.
[13] D. Koutsonikolas, S. Das, and Y . Hu, “Path planning of mobile landmarks
for localization in wireless sensor networks,” Comput. Commun., vol. 30,
pp. 2577–2592, 2007.
[14] T. Sit, Z. Liu, M. Ang, and W. Seah, “Multi-robot mobility enhanced hop-
count based localization in ad hoc networks,”Robot. Auton. Syst., vol. 55,
pp. 244–252, 2007.
[15] T. He, C. Huang, B. M. Blum, J. A. Stankovic, and T. Abdelzaher, “Range-
free localization schemes for large scale sensor networks,” in Proc. 9th
Annu. Int. Conf. Mobile Comput. Netw., 2003, pp. 81–95.
[16] D. Niculescu and B. Nath, “DV based positioning in ad hoc networks,”
Telecommun. Syst., vol. 22, no. 1–4, pp. 267–280, 2003.
[17] Y . Shang and W. Ruml, “Improved MDS-based localization,” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Commun., Hong Kong, 2004, pp. 2640–2651.
[18] P. Biswas and Y . Ye, “Semideﬁnite programming for ad hoc wireless
sensor network localization,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Symp. Inf. Process. Sens.
Netw., Berkeley, CA, Apr. 2004, pp. 46–54.
[19] A. Ihler, I. Fisher, J. W., R. Moses, and A. Willsky, “Nonparametric belief
propagation for self-localization of sensor networks,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas
Commun., vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 809–819, Apr. 2005.
[20] K. Yedavalli and B. Krishnamachari, “Sequence-based localization in
wireless sensor networks,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput. , vol. 7, no. 1,
pp. 81–94, Jan. 2008.
[21] J. A. Costa, N. Patwari, and A. O. H. Iii, “Distributed weighted-
multidimensional scaling for node localization in sensor networks,”ACM
Trans. Sens. Netw., vol. 2, pp. 39–64, 2005.
[22] U. Khan, S. Kar, and J. Moura, “A linear iterative algorithm for distributed
sensor localization,” inProc. 42nd Asilomar Conf. Signals, Syst. Comput.,
Oct. 2008, pp. 1160–1164.
[23] U. Khan, S. Kar, and J. Moura, “Distributed sensor localization in random
environments using minimal number of anchor nodes,” IEEE Trans.
Signal Process., vol. 57, no. 5, pp. 2000–2016, May 2009.
[24] U. Khan, S. Kar, and J. Moura, “Diland: An algorithm for distributed sen-
sor localization with noisy distance measurements,” IEEE Trans. Signal
Process., vol. 58, no. 3, pp. 1940–1947, Mar. 2010.
[25] S. Thrun, W. Burgard, and D. Fox, Probabilistic Robotics. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press, 2005.
[26] J. Kelly and G. S. Sukhatme, “Visual-inertial sensor fusion: Localization,
mapping and sensor-to-sensor self-calibration,”Int. J. Robot. Res., vol. 30,
no. 1, pp. 56–79, 2011.
[27] E. S. Jones and S. Soatto, “Visual-inertial navigation, mapping and local-
ization: A scalable real-time causal approach,” Int. J. Robot. Res., vol. 30,
no. 4, pp. 407–430, 2011.
[28] C. Wang, C. Thorpe, S. Thrun, M. Hebert, and H. Durrant-Whyte, “Simul-
taneous localization, mapping and moving object tracking,” Int. J. Robot.
Res., vol. 26, no. 9, pp. 889–916, Sep. 2007.
[29] A. Elfes, “Occupancy grids: A probabilistic framework for robot per-
ception and navigation” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Elect. Comput. Eng.,
Carnegie Mellon Univ., Pittsburgh, PA, 1989.
[30] H. P. Moravec, “Sensor fusion in certainty grids for mobile robots,” Artif.
Intell. Mag., no. 9, pp. 61–74, 1988.
[31] G. Ferri, M. Jakuba, E. Caselli, V . Mattoli, B. Mazzolai, D. Yoerger, and
P. Dario, “Localizing multiple gas/odor sources in an indoor environment
using Bayesian occupancy grid mapping,” inProc. Int. Conf. Intell. Robots
Syst., Nov. 2007, pp. 566–571.
[32] X. Zhang, Y . Sun, J. Xiao, and F. Cabrera-Mora, “Theseus gradient guide:
An indoor transmitter searching approach using received signal strength,”
in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom. , Shanghai, China, May. 2011,
pp. 2560–2565.
[33] C. Kim, D. Song, Y . Xu, and J. Yi, “Localization of multiple unknown
transient radio sources using multiple paired mobile robots with limited
sensing ranges,” inProc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., Shanghai, China,
May 2011, pp. 5167–5172.
[34] D. Song, C. Kim, and J. Yi, “On the time to search for an intermittent
signal source under a limited sensing range,”IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 27,
no. 2, pp. 313–323, Apr. 2011.
[35] D. Song, J. Yi, and Z. Goodwin, “Localization of unknown networked
radio sources using a mobile robot with a directional antenna,” in Proc.
Am. Control Conf., New York, Jul. 2007, pp. 5952–5957.
[36] D. Song, C. Kim, and J. Yi, “Simultaneous localization of multiple un-
known CSMA-based wireless sensor network nodes using a mobile robot
with a directional antenna,” J. Intell. Serv. Robots, vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 219–
233, Oct. 2009.
[37] D. Song, C. Kim, and J. Yi, “Monte carlo simultaneous localization of
multiple unknown transient radio sources using a mobile robot with a
directional antenna,” inProc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom.,K o b e ,J a p a n ,
May 2009, pp. 3154–3159.
[38] M. Kim and N. Y . Chong, “Direction sensing rﬁd reader for mobile robot
navigation,” IEEE Trans. Autom. Sci. Eng., vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 44–54, Jan.
2009.
[39] Y . Sun, J. Xiao, and F. Cabrera-Mora, “Robot localization and energy-
efﬁcient wireless communications by multiple antennas,” in Proc.
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. , St. Louis, MO, Oct. 2009,
pp. 377–381.
[40] W. L. Stutzman and G. A. Thiele, Antenna Theory and Design .N e w
York: Wiley, 2003.
[41] R. S. Elliott, Antenna Theory and Design. Piscataway, NJ: IEEE Press,
2003.
[42] B. Garel, “Likelihood ratio test for univariate Gaussian mixture,”J. Statist.
Plan. Infer., vol. 96, pp. 325–350, 2001.
[43] C. Delmas, “On likelihood ratio tests in Gaussian mixture models,”Indian
J. Statist., vol. 65, no. 3, pp. 513–531, Aug. 2003.
[44] T. Cormen, C. E. Leiserson, R. Rivest, and C. Stein, Eds., Instruction to
Algorithms. Cambridge, MA: McGraw-Hill, 1989.
[45] C. Amb ¨uhl, “An optimal bound for the MST algorithm to compute en-
ergy efﬁcient broadcast trees in wireless networks,” in Automata, Lan-
guages and Programming (Lecture Notes in Computer Science Series
3580), L. Caires, G. Italiano, L. Monteiro, C. Palamidessi, and M. Yung,
Eds. Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag, 2005, pp. 1139–1150.
[46] G. McLachlan, Discriminant Analysis and Statistical Pattern Recognition.
New York: Wiley-Interscience, 1992.
[47] H. Choset, W. Burgard, S. Hutchinson, G. Kantor, L. E. Kavraki, K. Lynch,
and S. Thrun, Principles of Robot Motion: Theory, Algorithms, and Im-
plementation. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, Apr. 2005.
[48] M. Bazaraa, H. Shelrali, and C. Shetty, Nonlinear Programming: Theory
and Algorithms. New York: Wiley, 1993, p. 132, Def. 4.1.1.
Dezhen Song (S’02–M’04–SM’09) received the
B.S. and M.S. degrees from Zhejiang University,
Hangzhou, China, in 1995 and 1998, respectively,
and the Ph.D. degree from the University of Califor-
nia, Berkeley, in 2004.
He is currently an Associate Professor with the
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
Texas A&M University, College Station, TX. His pri-
mary research interests include networked robotics,
distributed sensing, computer vision, surveillance,
and stochastic modeling.
Dr. Song received the Kayamori Best Paper Award at the 2005 IEEE In-
ternational Conference on Robotics and Automation (with J. Yi and S. Ding).
He received the National Science Foundation Faculty Early Career Develop-
ment (CAREER) Award in 2007. He co-chaired IEEE Robotics and Automa-
tion Society Technical Committee on Networked Robots from 2007 to 2009.
He is an Associate Editor of the IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS and an
Associate Editor of the IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND
ENGINEERING.
680 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 28, NO. 3, JUNE 2012
Chang-Young Kim (S’11) received the B.S. de-
gree in electrical engineering from Korea University,
Seoul, Korea, in 2005. He is currently working toward
the Ph.D. degree with the Department of Computer
Science and Engineering, Texas A&M University,
College Station.
He was with the GIT Co., Ltd, Seoul, where he
was involved in the ﬁelds of automotive and embed-
ded systems. His research interests include mobile
robots, networked robots, radio localization, robot
navigation, sensor networks, and surveillance.
Jingang Yi (S’99–M’02–SM’07) received the B.S.
degree in electrical engineering from Zhejiang Uni-
versity, Hangzhou, China, in 1993, the M.Eng. de-
gree in precision instruments from Tsinghua Univer-
sity, Beijing, China, in 1996, and the M.A. degree
in mathematics and the Ph.D. degree in mechani-
cal engineering from the University of California,
Berkeley, in 2001 and 2002, respectively.
He is currently an Assistant Professor with the
Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineer-
ing, Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ. His research
interests include autonomous robotic systems, dynamic systems and con-
trol, and automation science and engineering, with applications to biomedical
systems, civil infrastructural and transportation systems, and semiconductor
manufacturing.
Dr. Yi received the 2010 National Science Foundation Faculty Early Career
Development (CAREER) Award. He has co-authored papers that received the
Kayamori Best Paper Award from the 2005 IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation. He currently an Associate Editor of the American
Society of Mechanical Engineers Dynamic Systems and Control Division and
the IEEE Robotics and Automation Society Conference Editorial Boards. He
is an Associate Editor for the IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE
AND ENGINEERING.