Active localization of multiple targets using noisy relative
measurements*
Selim Engin 1 and V olkan Isler1
Abstract— Consider a mobile robot tasked with localizing tar-
gets at unknown locations by obtaining relative measurements.
The observations can be bearing or range measurements. How
should the robot move so as to localize the targets and minimize
the uncertainty in their locations as quickly as possible? Most
existing approaches are either greedy in nature or rely on
accurate initial estimates.
We formulate this path planning problem as an unsupervised
learning problem where the measurements are aggregated using
a Bayesian histogram ﬁlter. The robot learns to minimize the
total uncertainty of each target in the shortest amount of time
using the current measurement and an aggregate representation
of the current belief state. We analyze our method in a series
of experiments where we show that our method outperforms a
standard greedy approach. In addition, its performance is also
comparable to an ofﬂine algorithm which has access to the true
location of the targets.
I. I NTRODUCTION
Environmental monitoring is an application area where
robotics can have a major impact. Robots can be used for
gathering data, collecting samples and performing surveil-
lance across large environments over long periods of time. A
practical problem of interest is the localization of animals in
the wild who have been previously radio-tagged by wildlife
biologists. The animals can be localized by mobile robots
which can obtain bearing measurements using a directional
antenna. Figure 1 shows two examples of such platforms
built by our group.
In this paper, we study the problem of localizing multiple
targets given their noisy measurements relative to a robot.
In particular, we study the bearing-only and range-only
measurement models which are commonly used in practice.
For both of these models, the localization uncertainty given
the true target location and robot measurement locations is
well established (Section III-A). However, computing the
measurement locations is hard when the true location of the
target is known or if there are multiple targets.
Existing methods described in Section II mostly focused
on the case where there is only a single target. Moreover,
most of them are greedy in nature, optimizing the mutual
information or entropy at each step locally. This approach
is however susceptible to getting stuck in local minima
when the best next steps are in opposite directions. Other
approaches rely on accurate initial estimates, which may not
be available in general settings. We show that instead of using
a local greedy approach, long-term planning and maximizing
*This work was supported by the NSF grant #1617718.
1Selim Engin and V olkan Isler are with Department of Computer
Science and Engineering, University of Minnesota, MN 55455, USA
{engin003, isler }@umn.edu
Fig. 1: Target localization problem: given noisy relative
measurements, the goal is to localize the targets as quickly
as possible using a robot with complex dynamics such as an
autonomous quadrotor (left) or surface vehicle [1] (right).
the expected rewards can help the localization system. We
assume all the targets to be initially observable, therefore we
do not address the search problem. However, a noisy initial
observation of the target can result in arbitrarily bad initial
estimates. Our method is able to accurately localize targets
using a bearing-only sensor with noise level up to 30◦ angles,
and range measurements with up to 30 meters of error in a
200 × 200 m2 area.
Our work lies in the class of model-free Reinforcement
Learning (RL), where the robot learns to accomplish a given
task in a ﬁxed time-horizon without using prior information
about the environment or robot dynamics. In contrast to
model-based methods, this approach does not use an en-
gineered or a learned dynamics model. Instead, it directly
optimizes its policy through a sequence of trial-and-error
process [2].
While the policy learning is performed in a model-
free paradigm, our method uses a representation of the
environment that encapsulates the sensor modality and the
uncertainty of the estimations. Speciﬁcally, we use a top-
down image of the environment where the intensity of each
pixel indicates the likelihood of that point being the position
of the target. As the sensor noise increases there are more
pixels indicating a high likelihood of containing the target.
II. R ELATED WORK AND CONTRIBUTIONS
The problem of localizing targets has received signiﬁcant
attention and been studied in several different settings. In
this section we go over three different scenarios where each
setup has a different set of assumptions about the target
and sensor mobility: a) sensor placement, the problem of
deploying a group of static sensors to localize static targets;
b) active target localization, the problem of localizing static
targets with mobile sensors; and c) active target tracking, the
problem of tracking mobile targets with mobile sensors.
arXiv:2002.09850v1  [cs.RO]  23 Feb 2020
A. Sensor Placement
In the sensor placement problem we have a group of
static targets whose positions are unknown residing in a
given candidate area and an uncertainty model. The goal
is usually to minimize the number of sensors deployed in
the area given a desired uncertainty level [3], [4], [5], or to
optimize the sensor-target geometries after ﬁxing the number
of sensors [6]. Both the targets and sensors are assumed to be
static in this setting, and a greedy approach is shown to have
a near-optimal performance [3]. The results in this setting,
however, are not directly applicable to the case when the
targets or sensors are moving.
B. Active Target Localization
In the problem of active target localization, one or multiple
mobile robots need to localize the targets as quickly as possi-
ble. In [7] a method is proposed to perform target localization
with bearing measurements using the Fisher information to
optimize the trajectory of a single aerial vehicle. In [1] a
cooperative algorithm is presented to localize a static target
using two networked robots with communication constraints.
The robots in this work need to periodically meet to update
their estimate of the target position.
C. Active Target Tracking
In the active target tracking problem, both the sensors and
targets are able to move. The target motion can be modeled
in various ways and this model plays an important role in
the performance of the tracking system. One approach is
to treat the target motion adversarial, which means that the
target actively evades the sensor [8], [9]. Another approach
can model the motion of the target to be a random walk,
especially when there is no prior information about the
mobility of the target [10], [11]. The mobility is modeled
by a 2D Brownian motion in [12] where the target can move
within a bounded region.
For this problem setting, most of the existing approaches
use a position-based measurement model [13], [14], [15],
[16]. This enables the robot to estimate the target positions
with a few observations, unlike using bearing or range
measurements where the geometry of the sensor-target con-
ﬁguration signiﬁcantly impacts the accuracy of the estimator.
D. Statement of contributions
Our contributions can be summarized as follows.
• We propose a novel RL formulation of the multi-target
localization problem.
• We present a representation to model the localization
estimates for each target encapsulating the uncertainty
in the predictions.
• We compare our RL algorithm against a greedy ap-
proach that uses local observations to plan the sensor
motion, and an ofﬂine algorithm which has access to
the true positions of the targets.
III. P RELIMINARIES
The setup in our problem consists of a tracker robot with
an omnidirectional bearing or range sensor and a set of
m targets deployed in an environment V. The mobility of
the robot is modeled to be holonomic, that is it can do
instantaneous turns without any kinematic constraints. We
denote the position of the robot at time t by pt ∈ R2.
Similarly, the locations of the targets are q = {q1,...,q m},
whereqi ∈ R2, and the predicted positions of the targets are
ˆq. The trajectory of the robot until time step t is denoted
by P1:t =p1,...,p t. Throughout the paper we use a global
frame, such as the initial coordinate frame of the robot to
denote the positions of the robot and targets.
The true bearing direction from a sensor location p =
(px,py) to a target location qi = (qx
i,qy
i ) is denoted by
φi =φ(p,qi) and expressed as:
φi = arctan
(
(qy
i −py)/(qx
i −px)
)
. (1)
We assume that the measurement model has a Gaussian
distribution noise. Then, a bearing measurement from a
sensor can be written as ˆφi = φi +e, where e ∼ N (0,σ 2
s)
and σ2
s is the variance of the sensor measurement error. We
denote the set of bearing measurements acquired from a robot
position pt at time step t by ˆΦt = {ˆφ1,... ˆφm}.
The distance between a sensor p and a target qi is denoted
bydi =d(p,qi). Similar to the bearing measurement model,
we assume a normally distributed zero-mean noise for the
range measurements. A range measurement at time t is
expressed as ˆdi =di +e, where e ∼ N (0,σ 2
s). Throughout
the paper we denote the relative noisy measurements by ˆzi,
and use ˆφi or ˆdi to indicate a speciﬁc sensor model.
A. Uncertainty Measures
In this section we describe the uncertainty measures used
in the paper.
1) Fisher Information: Predicting a target location using
relative measurements is typically achieved by triangulation
from multiple positions. Quantifying the accuracy of the
triangulation relies on the geometry of the sensor-target
conﬁguration and the noise in the sensor measurement.
For a given sensor-target geometry and a noise level
in the measurements, we can use the Fisher Information
Matrix (FIM) to compute the amount of information given
by the measurements. The FIM characterizes the amount
of information an observable parameter carries about an
unobservable variable. In our case, the observable parameter
is the relative measurement and the unobservable variable of
interest is the position of the target.
Suppose Fq is the FIM for a given sensor-target conﬁgura-
tion, where q∗ is the true location of the target. The ( i,j )-th
entry of Fq for a single target can be expressed as:
(Fq)i,j = E
[ ∂
∂qi
ln(P(ˆz|q)) ∂
∂qj
ln(P(ˆz|q))
]
, (2)
where P(·) denotes the probability density function. The
determinant of the FIM is inversely proportional to the
uncertainty area of the estimation [17], [18]. The determinant
of Fq for n bearing measurements is given by [19]:
det(Fq) = 1
σ4s
∑
{pi,pj}∈P
sin2(φ(pi,q∗) −φ(pj,q∗))
d(pi,q∗)2 ·d(pj,q∗)2 , i<j
(3)
where σ2
s denotes the variance of the measurement error,
and P deﬁnes the set of all pairwise combinations as
{{pi,pj}} withi,j ∈ {1,...,n } andi<j . The inverse FIM
F−1
q (also known as the Cramer-Rao inequality lower bound)
quantiﬁes an uncertainty ellipsoid for unbiased estimators.
The square root of the eigenvalues of F−1
q , denoted by√λi deﬁnes the axis length of the ellipsoid along the i-th
dimension.
The determinant of F−1
q provides a scalar for measuring
the uncertainty. For a given sensor-target geometry and a
measurement model, we measure the total uncertainty by:
U(P, q) =
m∑
i=1
det(F−1
qi ). (4)
Since the true position of the target is required to compute
the Fisher information, it is challenging to obtain an accurate
uncertainty estimate based on the Fisher information in prac-
tical scenarios. The next uncertainty measure we present is
better suited for practical applications where we do not have
access to the true positions. We use the Fisher information
as an uncertainty estimate in the ofﬂine case where the true
position of the targets are available to the algorithm.
2) Bayesian Histograms: In Bayesian histograms we dis-
cretize the environment V into a grid, where each cell
of the grid indicates the likelihood of being the target
position given the measurements. Bayesian histograms are
particularly useful to represent the likelihood posteriors for
models with nonlinear dynamics. Filtering techniques relying
on linearization, in general are sensitive to disturbances when
using a nonlinear sensor model like bearing measurements.
Without accurate initialization, the measurement errors can
easily lead to a poor localization performance. Several exist-
ing methods [20], [21] have also used Bayesian histograms
for the problem of target localization.
Since the measurement model assumes a zero-mean nor-
mal distribution for the sensor noise, we can compute the
probability of a point v being the true target location q∗
given a relative measurement ˆz as:
P(v =q∗|p, ˆz) =f(zv|ˆz,σ 2
s) = 1√
2πσ 2s
exp{− 1
2σ2s
(zv − ˆz)2},
(5)
where zv is the true angle φ(p,v ) or distance d(p,v )
between the point v and a robot position p. Over the course
of the robot’s trajectory, the likelihood of a point is updated
as measurements are obtained:
P(v =q∗|P1:T, ˆz1:T ) =
T∏
k=1
f(z(pk,v )|ˆzk,σ 2
s). (6)
Fig. 2: The Bayesian histograms computed by aggregating
the bearing measurements taken from the sensor trajectory
shown in red. The blue dot corresponds to the true target
location, and the darker to brighter colors in the heatmap
indicate an increase in the likelihood.
At each measurement update, the probabilities are normal-
ized such that maxv∈Vf(z(pk,v )|ˆzk,σ 2
s) = 1, where V is a
given domain for the target positions. When initializing the
heatmap, we use a uniform distribution of probability 1 indi-
cating that each point in the domain is equally likely to be the
true position of the target. We denote the histogram at time
step t for a target qi as Ht(P1:t, ˆz1:t,i ). The histograms are
updated separately and stacked as a tensor Ht(P1:t, ˆz1:t) ∈
Rm×W×H. The histogram dimensions W ×H determine the
granularity of the grid discretization of the environment and
result in a trade-off between accuracy and efﬁciency. Finer
resolution histograms have smaller discretization errors at the
cost of higher computational resources. An instance of the
Bayesian histogram representation is shown in Figure 2. At
each time step the bearing measurement is incorporated to
update the likelihood of the points in V. The sensor trajectory
and target position are overlaid in the heatmap ﬁgures to give
context.
B. Reinforcement Learning
In Reinforcement Learning (RL), we have an agent sensing
and acting within an environment over a course of discrete
time steps. At each time step, the agent observes the current
state of the environment and performs an action. Depending
on the current state and action pair, the state changes and
the agent receives a reward according to an environment
model [2].
These type of problems are usually formulated as Markov
Decision Processes (MDP) described by statess ∈ S , actions
a ∈ A, transition dynamics T : S × A × S →[0, 1], a reward
functionr : S ×A×S → R, and a discount factor γ ∈ [0, 1].
For the case when the agent cannot fully observe the states,
this description is redeﬁned as a Partially Observable MDP
(POMDP), where there is also an associated observation
function.
The agent selects actions using a policy π(a|s) so as to
maximize the expectedγ-discounted future rewards given by
Gt = E
[∑T
i=tγi−tr(si,ai,si+1)
]
, where T is the planning
time-horizon. Suppose that Qπ(s,a ) is the expected future
returns by taking the action a in state s using the policy π,
which is expressed asQπ(s,a ) = E
[
Gt|st =s,at =a
]
. The
goal of RL algorithms is to learn an optimal policy π∗ that
maximizes the expected future returns for all state and action
pairs. A popular method for this problem is Q-learning [22],
where the Bellman equation,
Q(st,at) = ET (st+1|st,at)
[
r(st,at,st+1)+γ max
a′
Q(st+1,a′)
]
,
(7)
is recursively used to adjust Qπ to approach the optimal Q-
values for π∗. When the state and action spaces are large,
this value function can be approximated as a neural network
Qθ(s,a ), with parameters θ.
IV. P ROBLEM STATEMENT
We are now ready to formally state the problem studied
in this paper.
Problem 1 (Target Localization). We are given a mobile
robot equipped with a sensor obtaining relative measure-
ments according to a known measurement model, a starting
position p1, a ﬁxed planning horizon T and a set of targets
whose positions are unknown. In addition, we are given a
function U(P,q ) measuring the uncertainty of the target esti-
mates for a given sensor-target geometry and a measurement
model. The goal is to ﬁnd a path P1:T =p1,...,p T for the
robot such that the total uncertainty of the target positions∑m
i=1 U(P1:T,qi) is minimized.
V. M ETHOD
Our method uses two different models to represent the
state. In this section we go over these representations and
present our unsupervised learning method for target local-
ization.
Target 
Dynamics
Robot 
DynamicsRL Agent
HeatmapsImage
Fig. 3: Method overview: A single iteration of the robot-
environment interaction. The blue arrow indicates the relative
measurements vector used in the multi-modal representation,
while the red arrow marks the image used as the observation
in the image representation.
An overview of our method is shown in Figure 3. At
every iteration, the robot acquires noisy measurements from
the target locations according to the measurement model.
The measurements are either taken as raw observations,
or they are aggregated into a single image representation.
Depending on the observation, the agent selects an action
which drives the robot to a new position. The measurements
are accumulated in the form of heatmaps at each step, which
are then used to predict the position of the target. This
process repeats until the end of the planning time-horizon.
A. Representing the observations
We start with describing the representations we use for the
target observations.
1) Multi-modal representation: The ﬁrst representation
our method uses is a multi-modal Gaussian distribution for
characterizing the localization belief. At each step, the robot
receives a distinct bearing or range measurement from all
the targets (i.e. perfect assignment). The sensor noise σs is
assumed to be known, therefore we are able to represent the
likelihood distribution over the domain V. We construct the
likelihood of each point v ∈ V as the normalized probability
f(zv|ˆz,σ 2
s), where ˆz is the observation for a single target.
In a standard Markov process, at any time step the next
state depends on the current state and the action. For local-
izing the targets, the robot needs to maintain an estimate of
the target position using observations from the past locations.
Hence, we append the predictions for the target positions to
the state vector so as to select the next actions.
The augmented state of the system is deﬁned as st :=
(pt, ˆzt, ˆqt) ∈ R2+m+2m, concatenating the position vector of
the robotpt, observations from each target ˆzt, and a ﬂattened
vector of the predicted positions of the targets ˆqt. In the
multi-modal representation, we use the noisy bearing ˆφt or
range measurements ˆdt as the observation vector ˆzt.
2) Image representation: We also use images to represent
the belief for the predicted position of the target. The image
It ∈ RW×H at time step t is computed by the sum of
histograms maintained for each target estimate, expressed
as:
It =
m∑
i=1
Ht(P1:t, ˆz1:t,i ). (8)
The image is then normalized to have values in the range
[0, 1], and resized into a desired resolution with bilinear
interpolation. We use a convolutional neural network with
the ResNet-34 architecture [23] followed by three fully
connected layers to encode It into a latent vector lt ∈ Rc.
For all our experiments, we set the dimension of the latent
code to bec = 128. This encoding vector implicitly describes
the uncertainty level and the position estimates for all the
targets in a latent space.
The state vector we use in the image representation is
expressed as st := (pt,lt) ∈ R2+c, a concatenation of the
position vector pt and latent code lt. The RL algorithm we
present next inputs the state vector corresponding to the
desired observation representation.
B. Learning target localization
We build our method on the Twin Delayed Deep De-
terministic (TD3) algorithm, a deep reinforcement learning
algorithm introduced in [24] that uses policy gradients to
directly optimize the policy network. Similar to the Deep
Deterministic Policy Gradient algorithm [25], TD3 uses an
actor-critic architecture that jointly learns an actor πϕ (the
policy) and a critic function Qθ (the value function) modeled
by neural networks with parameters ϕ and θ, respectively.
A replay buffer is maintained to store the previous interac-
tions of the agent, as in the Deep Q-Network algorithm [26].
The replay buffer stores samples in the form of ( si, ai,
si+1, ri, yi) tuples, where each sample is associated with
a state transition from si tosi+1 by executing the action ai.
With this transition, the agent receives a reward ri, and the
termination of the episode is indicated by a label yi ∈ {0, 1}.
To prevent the over-estimation bias of the value function,
TD3 trains two (twin) critic networks that are updated at
different (delayed) frequencies and uses the minimum of the
two as the value estimate. In our notation,minj=1,2Qθj(s,a )
is replaced by Qθ(s,a ) for brevity.
For both the actor and critic, periodically updated target
networksπϕ′ andQθ′ are also used. Constraining the change
in the target networks to be slow helps the stabilization when
learning the actor and critic functions.
The actor and critic networks are trained with the Adam
optimizer [27] using the loss functions Lactor and Lcritic
over mini-batches of size B. The loss functions are given
by:
Lactor = 1
B
B∑
i=1
−Qθ(si,πϕ(si)) (9)
Lcritic = 1
B
B∑
i=1
[
Qθ(si,ai) −
(
ri +γ(1 −yi)
·Qθ′
(
si+1,πϕ′(si+1)
))]2
.
(10)
Intuitively, the actor network πϕ is trained to maximize
the Q-values generated from the action πϕ(si) given a state
si, by minimizing −Qθ(si,πϕ(si)). On the other hand, the
critic network is trained to minimize the Bellman error
computed by a variation of the Bellman equation given
in Equation (7). During the training process, the slowly
changing target networks are assumed to characterize the
optimal policy and the Q-function. The policy πϕ inputs the
state vector st according to the observation representation
and outputs an action at. This action is a heading angle in
the continuous space represented in the inertial coordinate
frame, taking values bounded as at ∈ [0, 2π).
1) Reward functions: For learning the policy we use two
different reward functions, one for each observation repre-
sentation. In the multi-modal representation, the reward is the
negative mean squared error between the true and predicted
target positions, expressed as −1/m ·∑m
i ||qi − ˆqi||2.
For the image representation, on the other hand, we simply
use the mean of the image intensities as the loss term. The
reward function we use is given by − 1
WH ·∑
u,v It(u,v ),
where the pixel intensities of the image are all non-negative.
Maximizing this reward function minimizes the likelihood
of parts of the environment V not containing the targets,
which in turn amounts to minimizing the total entropy of the
Bayesian histograms. The reward function does not use the
true position of the targets and it is completely unsupervised.
VI. A NALYSIS
In this section we evaluate our method with a set of
experiments. The experiments are designed around questions
concerned about the performance of our method compared
to several baseline approaches.
A. Ofﬂine Trajectory Optimization
We ﬁrst investigate whether we can generate optimal
trajectories for a robot to minimize the uncertainty, given
the true position of the targets.
This problem has been addressed in two recent papers
for bearing [28] and range-only [29] measurement models,
where they study the optimal one-step action for the sensor
so as to maximize the information about the target estimate.
The cost function they provide for one-step maximization
has the form: Jφ = sin(φ(pt−1,q ) −φ(pt,q ))2/d(pt,q )2,
which is used to select the best action to move the sensor
from position pt−1 topt when using bearing measurements.
This expression closely resembles the geometric dilution
of precision (GDOP) [30], commonly used in navigation
systems. The uncertainty estimate using the GDOP function
for a given sensor-target geometry is given by:
UGDOP = d(pi,q ) ·d(pj,q )
| sin(φ(pi,q ) −φ(pj,q ))|. (11)
The ofﬂine algorithm we compare against is based on
the minimization of the uncertainty measure U(P, q). This
measure is equal to a constant times the GDOP function
summed over all pairs of the measurement locations P . We
call this ofﬂine algorithm O FFLINE -FISHER and present it in
Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 OFFLINE -FISHER
Input: U: uncertainty function , q: target positions, T : time
horizon, δp: step size
Output: P1:T : a trajectory for minimizing the uncertainty
of the target estimates
1: p1 ← Starting position of the robot
2: fort ← 2 to T do
3: a∗
t ← arg minat∈A
∑m
i=1 U(P1:t−1 ∪ {pt},qi)
4: p∗
t ←δp ·
[
cos(a∗
t ); sin(a∗
t )
]
; P1:t ←P1:t−1 ∪ {p∗
t }
5: returnP1:T
B. Localizing Static Targets
In practical settings, the true location of the targets are
not available to us, therefore the algorithm needs to operate
under uncertainty. The second method we compare against is
a local greedy approach which chooses an action to minimize
the conditional entropy given the past measurements of the
targets, at each step. This approach is commonly used in
practice and it resembles e.g. [31].
In this section we present experimental evaluations com-
paring our method against O FFLINE -FISHER and the local
greedy algorithms. Speciﬁcally, we investigate the contribu-
tion of having expected future rewards in the cost function,
in contrast to optimizing only the next step.
The environment used in our experiments is a 20 × 20
square area. The robot step size is set to be 0.5 units,
and the planning time-horizon is 50 steps. Variance of the
sensor noise for bearing measurements is σ2
s = 0.22 which
corresponds to about 11◦, and for range measurements it is
1. Each unit in the histogram has a resolution of 10, thus the
dimensions of Ht are 200 × 200.
(a) Target localization with bearing measurements
(b) Target localization with range measurements
Fig. 4: The trajectory of the robot acquiring bearing (a)
and range (b) measurements, using the image representation.
Both rows show the robot trajectory (red), true (blue) and
predicted (yellow) target position, also the Bayesian his-
togram as the colored heatmap. The insets contain the images
taken as input to the network at corresponding instants. Best
viewed in color.
Localization of two targets with bearing and range-only
measurements using the image representation is shown in
Figure 4. The ﬁgure shows the measurements acquired from
the targets by the robot, and its trajectory to minimize the
uncertainty of the predictions by using the corresponding
images. We see that the learned policy is able to generate
smooth trajectories that can accurately localize multiple
targets.
We provide quantitative results for the localizing the
targets using bearing and range-only measurements in Fig-
ure 5. The plots show the mean localization error using
four methods, averaged over 100 episodes. We compute
the localization error by ﬁnding the point with the highest
likelihood from the uncertainty histograms, and use it to
calculate the mean distance error between the predicted and
true target positions. We observe that both representations
we use outperform the greedy strategy over the course of an
episode, and have a performance very close to that of the
ofﬂine algorithm.
The mean localization error at the end of the episodes
for each method is presented in Table I. Unsurprisingly, the
best trajectories minimizing the localization uncertainty are
generated by the ofﬂine algorithm, in all cases. We see that
our method using either of the observation representation
yields very close results to the ofﬂine algorithm. The perfor-
mance of the two representations are similar using bearing
measurements, however the multi-modal representation re-
sults in better localization when using range measurements.
A possible reason for this is the spatially characteristics of
0 10 20 30 40 50
Number of iterations
0
2
4
6
8Localization error
Ours (multimodal)
Ours (image)
Oﬄine-Fisher
Local-Greedy
(a) m = 4, bearing (φ)
0 10 20 30 40 50
Number of iterations
0
2
4
6
8Localization error
Ours (multimodal)
Ours (image)
Oﬄine-Fisher
Local-Greedy (b) m = 8, bearing (φ)
0 10 20 30 40 50
Number of iterations
0
2
4
6
8Localization error
Ours (multimodal)
Ours (image)
Oﬄine-Fisher
Local-Greedy
(c) m = 4, range (d)
0 10 20 30 40 50
Number of iterations
0
2
4
6
8Localization error
Ours (multimodal)
Ours (image)
Oﬄine-Fisher
Local-Greedy (d) m = 8, range (d)
Fig. 5: Mean localization errors computed over 100 trials
using bearing and range measurements from m = 4 , 8
targets. Shaded area represents 1σ.
the image in the case of range measurements. In bearing
measurements the centroid of the high-likelihood pixels gives
a reasonable prediction about the target position, which is
not always the case for range measurements. However, in all
experiments we see that our method outperforms the greedy
strategy.
Method m = 2 m = 4 m = 8
φ
Ofﬂine-Fisher 0.228 / 0.012 0.285 / 0.006 0.268 / 0.301
Greedy-Local 2.599 / 0.404 2.444 / 0.190 2.406 / 0.284
Ours (Multi-modal) 0.481 / 0.092 0.457 / 0.272 0.557 / 0.223
Ours (Image) 0.479 / 0.255 0.305 / 0.041 0.618 / 0.256
d
Ofﬂine-Fisher 0.276 / 0.001 0.282 / 0.007 0.284 / 0.016
Greedy-Local 1.357 / 0.264 1.430 / 0.137 1.388 / 0.381
Ours (Multi-modal) 0.461 / 0.070 0.524 / 0.104 0.468 / 0.186
Ours (Image) 0.990 / 0.257 0.646 / 0.299 0.954 / 0.336
TABLE I: Mean and standard deviation of localization errors
using bearing ( φ) and range ( d) measurements from static
targets
C. Localizing Dynamic Targets
We next analyze the localization performance when the
targets are moving locally in a contained area. The target
movement is modeled by a 2D Brownian motion with a
covariance of 0.1I2, similar to the setting in [12]. Our current
formulation of the uncertainty histogram does not allow
tracking targets performing large displacements. However,
when the target motion is relatively small our method gives
reasonable performances compared to the baseline algo-
rithms.
The results of this experiment are reported in Table II.
We see that the error dynamics follow a similar trend to
the case of stationary targets. Moreover, for all the methods
Method m = 2 m = 4 m = 8
φ
Ofﬂine-Fisher 0.696 / 0.042 0.707 / 0.023 0.706 / 0.039
Greedy-Local 3.177 / 0.396 2.851 / 0.305 2.810 / 0.257
Ours (Multi-modal) 0.981 / 0.661 0.992 / 0.728 0.899 / 0.444
Ours (Image) 0.901 / 0.215 0.699 / 0.140 1.031 / 0.368
d
Ofﬂine-Fisher 0.591 / 0.028 0.597 / 0.013 0.611 / 0.033
Greedy-Local 1.985 / 0.106 2.003 / 0.149 2.159 / 0.338
Ours (Multi-modal) 0.947 / 0.034 0.874 / 0.134 0.845 / 0.180
Ours (Image) 1.312 / 0.328 0.978 / 0.279 1.390 / 0.195
TABLE II: Localization errors using relative measurements
from moving targets
the localization performance degrades as the targets start to
move.
D. Generalization Performance
The experiments reported so far evaluated the networks
with the same number of targets they have seen during
training. In this section we investigate the generalization
performance of our method when there are more number
of targets than what the network was trained on.
Since the image representation is agnostic to the number
of targets to be localized, testing our networks on generalized
number of targets is seamless. In this set of experiments, we
take our policy network trained with 2 targets and evaluate it
on m = 6 and 12 targets. The results presented in Table III
suggest that our method generalizes to localizing unseen
number of targets, owing to the image representation it uses
for the observations.
Method m = 6 m = 12
Ofﬂine-Fisher 0.315 / 0.067 0.286 / 0.038
Greedy-Local 2.316 / 0.146 1.921 / 0.299
Ours (Image) 0.729 / 0.202 0.728 / 0.267
TABLE III: Generalization performance: Evaluation on m =
6, 12 targets using a policy network trained to localize 2
targets with bearing measurements
VII. C ONCLUSION
In this paper we presented a method for localizing multiple
targets using bearing or range measurements. Leveraging
recent advances in reinforcement learning and convolutional
networks, our method is able to generate trajectories for a
robot to localize targets when obtaining noisy relative obser-
vations. We show that our method outperforms a standard
greedy approach and performs similarly compared to an
ofﬂine algorithm which has access to the true position of
the targets, without knowing the true target locations.
Future work includes tracking multiple targets that have
adversarial movements. Another interesting research direc-
tion is to study the target localization problem in higher di-
mensions and cluttered environments such as animal tracking
with an aerial vehicle in a forest.
REFERENCES
[1] Joshua Vander Hook, Pratap Tokekar, and V olkan Isler. Algorithms
for cooperative active localization of static targets with mobile bearing
sensors under communication constraints. IEEE Transactions on
Robotics, 31(4):864–876, 2015.
[2] Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement learning: An
introduction. MIT press, 2018.
[3] Carlos Guestrin, Andreas Krause, and Ajit Paul Singh. Near-optimal
sensor placements in gaussian processes. In Proceedings of the 22nd
International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 265–272. ACM,
2005.
[4] Onur Tekdas and V olkan Isler. Sensor placement for triangulation-
based localization. Transactions on Automation Science and Engi-
neering, 7(3):681–685, 2010.
[5] Krishnendu Chakrabarty, S Sitharama Iyengar, Hairong Qi, and Eu-
ngchun Cho. Grid coverage for surveillance and target location
in distributed sensor networks. IEEE transactions on computers ,
51(12):1448–1453, 2002.
[6] Shiyu Zhao, Ben M Chen, and Tong H Lee. Optimal placement of
bearing-only sensors for target localization. In 2012 American Control
Conference (ACC), pages 5108–5113. IEEE, 2012.
[7] Sameera Ponda, Richard Kolacinski, and Emilio Frazzoli. Trajectory
optimization for target localization using small unmanned aerial ve-
hicles. In AIAA Guidance, Navigation, and Control Conference , page
6015, 2009.
[8] Simone Battistini and Tal Shima. Differential games missile guidance
with bearings-only measurements. IEEE Transactions on Aerospace
and Electronic Systems , 50(4):2906–2915, 2014.
[9] Tal Shima and Josef Shinar. Time-varying linear pursuit-evasion game
models with bounded controls. J. of Guidance, Control, and Dynamics,
25(3):425–432, 2002.
[10] Dirk Schulz, Wolfram Burgard, Dieter Fox, and Armin B Cremers.
Tracking multiple moving targets with a mobile robot using particle
ﬁlters and statistical data association. In Proceedings 2001 ICRA.
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (Cat. No.
01CH37164), volume 2, pages 1665–1670. IEEE, 2001.
[11] Ting Yu and Ying Wu. Decentralized multiple target tracking using
netted collaborative autonomous trackers. In IEEE Computer Society
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , volume 1,
pages 939–946. IEEE, 2005.
[12] Haruki Nishimura and Mac Schwager. Sacbp: Belief space planning
for continuous-time dynamical systems via stochastic sequential action
control. In The 13th International Workshop on the Algorithmic
Foundations of Robotics (WAFR) , 2018.
[13] Heejin Jeong, Brent Schlotfeldt, Hamed Hassani, Manfred Morari,
Daniel D Lee, and George J Pappas. Learning q-network for active
information acquisition. In International Conference on Intelligent
Robots and Systems (IROS) . IEEE, 2019.
[14] Ruijie He, Abraham Bachrach, and Nicholas Roy. Efﬁcient planning
under uncertainty for a target-tracking micro-aerial vehicle. In Inter-
national Conference on Robotics and Automation , pages 1–8. IEEE,
2010.
[15] Karol Hausman, J ¨org M ¨uller, Abishek Hariharan, Nora Ayanian, and
Gaurav S Sukhatme. Cooperative multi-robot control for target
tracking with onboard sensing. The International Journal of Robotics
Research, 34(13):1660–1677, 2015.
[16] Alyssa Pierson and Daniela Rus. Distributed target tracking in
cluttered environments with guaranteed collision avoidance. In Inter-
national Symposium on Multi-Robot and Multi-Agent Systems (MRS) ,
pages 83–89. IEEE, 2017.
[17] Harry L Van Trees. Detection, estimation, and modulation theory, part
I: detection, estimation, and linear modulation theory . John Wiley &
Sons, 2004.
[18] Adrian N Bishop, Baris Fidan, Brian DO Anderson, Kutluyil Dogan-
cay, and Pubudu N Pathirana. Optimality analysis of sensor-target
geometries in passive localization: Part 1-bearing-only localization. In
3rd International Conference on Intelligent Sensors, Sensor Networks
and Information, pages 7–12. IEEE, 2007.
[19] Adrian N Bishop, Barıs ¸ Fidan, Brian DO Anderson, Kutluyıl
Do˘ganc ¸ay, and Pubudu N Pathirana. Optimality analysis of sensor-
target localization geometries. Automatica, 46(3):479–492, 2010.
[20] Folker Hoffmann, Hans Schily, Alexander Charlish, Matthew Ritchie,
and Hugh Grifﬁths. A rollout based path planner for emitter localiza-
tion. 2019.
[21] Oliver M Cliff, Robert Fitch, Salah Sukkarieh, Debra L Saunders, and
Robert Heinsohn. Online localization of radio-tagged wildlife with an
autonomous aerial robot system. In Robotics: Science and Systems ,
2015.
[22] Christopher JCH Watkins and Peter Dayan. Q-learning. Machine
learning, 8(3-4):279–292, 1992.
[23] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep
residual learning for image recognition. In IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 770–778, 2016.
[24] Scott Fujimoto, Herke Van Hoof, and David Meger. Addressing
function approximation error in actor-critic methods. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1802.09477, 2018.
[25] Timothy P Lillicrap, Jonathan J Hunt, Alexander Pritzel, Nicolas
Heess, Tom Erez, Yuval Tassa, David Silver, and Daan Wierstra.
Continuous control with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1509.02971, 2015.
[26] V olodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A Rusu,
Joel Veness, Marc G Bellemare, Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller,
Andreas K Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, et al. Human-level control
through deep reinforcement learning. Nature, 518(7540):529–533,
2015.
[27] Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic
optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980 , 2014.
[28] Shaoming He, Hyo-Sang Shin, and Antonios Tsourdos. Trajectory
optimization for target localization with bearing-only measurement.
Transactions on Robotics , 35(3):653–668, 2019.
[29] Shaoming He, Hyo-Sang Shin, and Antonios Tsourdos. Optimal active
target localisation strategy with range-only measurements. 2019.
[30] Alonzo Kelly. Precision dilution in triangulation based mobile robot
position estimation. In Intelligent Autonomous Systems , volume 8,
pages 1046–1053, 2003.
[31] Mac Schwager, Philip Dames, Daniela Rus, and Vijay Kumar. A
multi-robot control policy for information gathering in the presence
of unknown hazards. In Robotics research, pages 455–472. Springer,
2017.