Chalmers Publication Library
Characterizing the Worst-Case Position Error in Bearing-Only Target Localization
This document has been downloaded from Chalmers Publication Library (CPL). It is the author´s
version of a work that was accepted for publication in:
Workshop on Positioning, Navigation and Communication (WPNC)
Citation for the published paper:
Gholami, M. ; Gezici, S. ; Wymeersch, H. et al. (2015) "Characterizing the Worst-Case
Position Error in Bearing-Only Target Localization". Workshop on Positioning, Navigation
and Communication (WPNC)
Downloaded from: http://publications.lib.chalmers.se/publication/218784
Notice: Changes introduced as a result of publishing processes such as copy-editing and
formatting may not be reflected in this document. For a definitive version of this work, please refer
to the published source. Please note that access to the published version might require a
subscription.
Chalmers Publication Library (CPL) offers the possibility of retrieving research publications produced at Chalmers
University of Technology. It covers all types of publications: articles, dissertations, licentiate theses, masters theses,
conference papers, reports etc. Since 2006 it is the official tool for Chalmers official publication statistics. To ensure that
Chalmers research results are disseminated as widely as possible, an Open Access Policy has been adopted.
The CPL service is administrated and maintained by Chalmers Library.
(article starts on next page)
Characterizing the Worst-Case Position Error in
Bearing-Only Target Localization
Mohammad Reza Gholami ♮, Sinan Gezici ∗, Henk Wymeersch ♭, Erik G. Str¨ om♭, and Magnus Jansson ♮
♮ ACCESS Linnaeus Center, Electrical Engineering, KTH–Roya l Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden
∗ Department of Electrical and Electronics Engineering, Bil kent University, 06800, Ankara, Turkey
♭ Department of Signals and Systems, Chalmers University of T echnology, Gothenburg, Sweden
Emails: mohrg@kth.se, gezici@ee.bilkent.edu.tr, {henkw, erik.strom}@chalmers.se, janssonm@kth.se
Abstract—The worst-case position error provides valu-
able information for efﬁciently designing location based
services in wireless networks. In this study, a technique
based on a geometric approach is investigated for deriving
a reasonable upper bound on the position error in bearing-
only target localization. Assuming bounded measurement
errors, it is ﬁrst observed that the target node location
belongs to a polytope. When a single estimate of the
target location is available, the maximum distance from the
estimate to extreme points of the polytope gives an upper
bound on the position error. In addition, a technique based
on outer approximation is proposed to conﬁne the location
of the target node to an ellipsoid. Simulation results show
that the proposed upper bound is tight in many situations.
It is also observed that the proposed techniques can be
effectively used to derive sets containing the location of
target nodes.
Index Terms– Angle of arrival (AOA), position error,
upper-bound, outer-approximation, extreme points.
I. I NTRODUCTION
Position information plays a vital role for many
location-aware services in next generation wireless sys-
tems [1]. In the absence of GPS signals, e.g., due to
lack of access to GPS satellites in indoor-type scenarios,
the position information can be extracted from a network
consisting of a number of reference nodes at known lo-
cations via some type of measurements between different
nodes such as time-of-ﬂight or angle of arrival (AOA) [2].
In AOA-based localization, the angles estimated between
a target and anchor nodes are used to estimate the location
of the target node. Different algorithms, e.g., based on
maximum likelihood or least squares, can be developed
to estimate the location of the target node [3], [4].
Various approaches have been suggested to study the
performance of positioning algorithms. For example un-
der some regularity conditions on the distribution of mea-
surement errors, the Cram´ er-Rao lower bound (CRLB)
provides a lower limit on the variance of any unbiased
estimator [5]. It is noted that the CRLB and other
performance metrics studied in the literature generally
depends on the true location of the target node; hence,
they may face some drawbacks for practical applications.
In addition, available benchmarks such as the CRLB
are useful in the statistical sense, i.e., on average. For
example, if only a single estimate of the location is
available, it is not clear how existing approaches can
provide useful information [6].
Besides the lower bounds on the position estimation
error, in some situations we may need to characterize
the worst-case position error. The worst-case position
error can be useful for designing and offering services
in, e.g., position based recommender systems. In this
study, we investigate the lowest tractable upper bound
(in terms of complexity) on the position error based on
a geometric interpretation. To do that, we consider a
technique, originally investigated in the previous work
for distance based positioning [6], [7], in which the target
location is trapped to a closed bounded set (feasible set)
and then an upper bound on a single position error is
deﬁned with respect to the feasible set. We formulate the
problem of obtaining an upper bound on the position error
as ﬁnding the maximum distance from the estimate to the
feasible set, which is a nonconvex problem and in general
might be difﬁcult to solve. A relaxation technique can
be used to solve the nonconvex problem. Alternatively,
assuming the feasible region is bounded, we instead ﬁnd
the extreme points of the feasible set (a polytope) and
caculate the maximum distance to those points. Using the
estimate and an upper bound, we can also ﬁnd a ball that
contains the location of target node. In addition, when
the extreme points of the polytope are available, we can
also obtain a minimum volume ellipsoid containing the
location of the target node.
In summary, the main contributions of this study are
• an extension of the idea of upper bound to AOA-
based localization,
• an upper bound based on the maximum distance
from a single estimate to the extreme points of a
polytope derived from AOA measurements,
• a minimum volume ellipsoid covering the polytope
that contains the location of the target node (without
having any estimate of the target location).
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows.
Section II explains the signal model considered in this
study. In Section III, an upper bound on the position
error is investigated. Simulation results are presented in
Section IV. Finally, Section V makes come concluding
remarks.
II. S YSTEM MODEL
Consider a 2D wireless network 1 consisting of N an-
chor nodes located at zi = [xi yi]T ∈ R2, i = 1, . . . , N .
The angle estimate between the anchor nodes and a target
node at unknown location s = [xs ys]T ∈ R2 (in radians)
is given by [8]
ˆθi = atan ys − yi
xs − xi  
≜θi
+ni, i = 1, . . . , N (1)
where the measurement error ni is modeled by some
proper distributions [9].
Assumption 1: For the rest of the paper, we assume
that ys ≥ yi; hence 0 ≤ θi ≤ π.
To avoid ambiguities due to noise, we modify the
estimate in (1) as
ˆθi = min{π, max{ˇθi, 0}}, i = 1, . . . , N. (2)
We also assume that the angle ˆθi is computed with
respect to a global coordinate systems, meaning that the
orientation is known in every anchor node.
Based on AOA measurements in (1), we can develop a
localization algorithm to estimate the location of the tar-
get node. Suppose an estimate of the target location, say
ˆs, is available. We are then interested in characterizing
the position error deﬁned by
e(s) ≜ ∥ˆs − s∥. (3)
It is clear from (3) that the position error depends on the
true unknown location s; hence, it may be difﬁcult to
characterize the position error. Instead, we may consider
the worst-case position error. As mentioned earlier, the
worst-case position error provides useful information for
various location based services. To study the worst-case
position error, we can consider the following optimization
problem:
minimize
w
w
subject to e(s) ≤ w,
s ∈ S , (4)
where S is a feasible set containing the possible values
of the location of the target node.
Determining a suitable feasible set in (4) can be quite
challenging. We now consider a simple approach to
1In 3D networks both azimuth and elevation angles should be
considered, but the approach can be similarly extended.
obtain a useful feasible set S. We ﬁrst make the following
assumption [10].
Assumption 2: The measurement errors in (1) is as-
sumed to be distributed over a bounded set, i.e., ni ∈
{Li, U i}.
Assumption 2 implies that the measurement error in the
AOA estimate in (1) cannot be arbitrarily large. This
assumption can, at least approximately, be valid in some
practical scenarios, e.g., in cases with high signal-to-noise
ratios (SNRs).
We assume that the lower and upper bounds Li and Ui
are a priori known. If Li and Ui are unknown, they can
be estimated from measurements. For example, if there
are multiple measurements ˆθ
k
i , k = 1 , . . . , K (K is the
number of AOA estimates in the anchor node i) and if K
is sufﬁciently large, we can use the following approach
to estimate Li and Ui:
ˆLi = min
k
¯
ˆθk
i , ˆUi = max
k
¯
ˆθk
i , (5)
where ¯
ˆθk
i ≜ ˆθi − (1/K ) ∑K
i=1 ˆθi.
From Assumption 2 and the relation in (1), we can
conclude that
max{ˆθi − Ui, 0}
 
≜mLi
≤ θi ≤ min{ˆθi − Li, π }  
≜mU i
(6)
meaning that the true θi belongs to an interval deﬁned
by the estimate ˆθi and bounds Li and Ui.
We ﬁrst deﬁne the following halfplanes:
HL
i ≜ {s | aT
lis ≥ bli if mLi ≤ π
2 &
aT
lis ≤ bli if mLi ≥ π
2 } (7)
HU
i ≜ {s | aT
uis ≥ bui if mU i ≤ π
2 &
aT
uis ≤ bui if mU i ≥ π
2 } (8)
where
ali ≜ [− tan(mLi) 1] T (9)
aui ≜ [− tan(mU i) 1] T (10)
bli− ≜ tan(mLi)xi + yi (11)
bui− ≜ tan(mU i)xi + yi. (12)
We then deﬁne the following set (cone):
Si ≜ HL
i
⋂
HU
i . (13)
From the expressions above, it is clear that the location
of the target node belongs to the following convex set:
s ∈ S =
N⋂
i=1
Si. (14)
As an example, Fig. 1 shows how upper and lower bounds
on the AOA estimate can help deﬁne a feasible set –a
polytope– containing the location of the target node.
zi
θi
mLi
mU i
s
Fig. 1. An example of AOA localization. The feasible set deﬁn ed by
the red polytope contains the location of the target node.
Remark 1: It may happen that the polyhedron S is
unbounded, e.g., if the target is very far from anchor
nodes. But if the target is close to anchor nodes, the
polyhedron (polytope) S is closed.
Remark 2: Considering the polytope containing the
location of target node, a simple positioning algorithm to
obtain a coarse estimate of the location can be designed
based on (serial or parallel) projection onto halfplanes
HL
i and HU
i . Projection onto a halfspace is simple
operation [11] and the resulting algorithm would be of
low complexity [12].
III. A N UPPER BOUND ON A SINGLE POSITION ERROR
We now employ the approach proposed in [6] to ﬁnd
an upper bound on the position error e(s). Namely, we
consider the following optimization problem:
vb : maximize
s
∥s − ˆs∥
subject to s ∈
N⋂
i=1
Si (15)
∥s − zi∥ ≤ dmax, i = 1, . . . , N
where a constraint is added based on the maximum
distance from a target to an anchor node in order to make
sure that the feasible region is bounded. Note that such
a constraint makes sense in practice since for detecting
and estimating the appearance of the target node and
the AOA, respectively, we need a minimum level of
SNRs, which in turn depends on the distance between
two nodes. In fact, when the polytope is unbounded, the
last constraint helps have a bounded solution. The optimal
value vb gives an upper bound on the position error, that
is, e(s) ≤ vb.
The problem in (16) is nonconvex and can be difﬁcult
to solve [13], [14]. One way to approximately solve the
nonconvex problem in (16) is to employ a well-known
convex relaxation technique. For details of the approach,
see [6], [13].
We now assume that S is bounded and use another
approach to ﬁnd an upper bound on the position error.
Suppose the set of k extreme points of the polytope
are denoted by P = {p1, . . . , pk} (the vertices of the
polytope). It is easy to conclude that the worst-case
position error with respect to the ploytope S is given
by
vb = max
i
∥ˆs − pi∥. (16)
Note that ﬁnding the extreme points of the polytope S is
not difﬁcult if N is not large, specially for 2D networks.
Now, if we form a ball with center ˆs and radius vb, i.e.,
B = {x ∈ R2 | ∥x − ˆs∥ ≤ vb}, (17)
we can conclude that s ∈ B .
Another approach to ﬁnd a set containing the location
of the target node is to ﬁnd the minimum volume ellipsoid
containing the polytope S. To ﬁnd the (L¨ owner-John)
ellipsoid, we consider an ellipsoid deﬁned by [15], [16]
E = {x | ∥Bx + d∥ ≤ 1} (18)
where B is a 2× 2 symmetric positive deﬁnite matrix and
d ∈ R2. The minimum volume ellipsoid is then computed
by solving the following convex optimization problem
[16]:
minimize
B, d
log det B−1
subject to ∥Bpi + d∥ ≤ 1, i = 1, . . . , N (19)
It is noted that the sets in (17) and (19) are derived
differently. For ball deﬁned in (19), an estimate of the
location is required, while for the second approach, i.e.,
minimum volume ellipsoid, no prior estimate of the
location is required. It is clear that the second approach
is more complex than the ﬁrst technique.
The performance of the proposed approaches is eval-
uated through computer simulations for a moving target
in a 2D network.
IV. S IMULATION RESULTS
In this section, we evaluate the performance of the pro-
posed techniques for a network consisting of 11 anchor
nodes at zi = [5(i− 1) 0], i = 1, . . . , 11 and a target node
moving on a trajectory according to a quadratic curve
y = 0 . 001x2 − 0. 01x + 10 . We consider a truncated
Gaussian distribution over [− πT / 180, πT / 180] radians
dramatized with T degress. To ﬁnd the extreme points,
we ﬁrst calculate all the crossing points between every
pair of lines and then check which points belong to the
intersection of halfplanes.
We set the variance of noise ni equal to 1. In every
position of the target, anchor nodes measure AOA and
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
 
 
Relative tightness
CDF
T = 1 o
T = 10 o
T = 15 o
Fig. 2. The CDF of relative tightness for different noise int erval.
then a least squares (LS) technique is used to ﬁnd an
estimate of the location. For details of the LS algorithm,
see, e.g., [17].
To evaluate the tightness of the proposed technique, we
consider the relative tightness as τv ≜ (vb − e(s))/e (s)
[6]. We study the cumulative distribution function (CDF)
of τv, i.e., Pr {τv ≤ x}. In the following, we generate
e(s) from LS estimation.
Fig. 2 shows the relative tightness for different values
of the lower and upper bound on the measurement noise.
In every position of the target node, we consider 100
realization of measurement errors. As expected increasing
the interval makes the feasible polytope S larger; hence
the bound will be larger. As stated in [6], for a relatively
ﬁxed estimation error, the relative tightness degrades with
increasing (the volume of) the intersection.
Fig. 3 shows how the location of the target node can
be conﬁned to feasible sets, a ball and an ellipsoid de-
rived from the upper bound (UppBall) and the minimum
volume ellipsoid (MinV olEllip). In this simulation, we set
T = 5. In general, MinV olEllip is smaller than UppBall.
It is also observed that the geometry of the network plays
an important role in the size of the intersection and con-
sequently on the volumes of UppBall and MinV olEllip.
V. C ONCLUSIONS
In this study a technique has been investigated to
ﬁnd an upper bound on the position error. Assuming
that measurement errors in AOA estimates are bounded,
the location of the target node can be conﬁned to the
intersection of a number of halfplanes (a polytope).
Then, the maximum distance from an estimate of the
location to the polytope determines an upper bound on the
position error. In addition, a minimum volume ellipsoid
has been derived that contains the location of the target
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
 
 
19.619.82020.220.420.6
10
10.5
11
 
 
x [m]
y [m]
Estimate ˆs
Target location s
Anchor node
UppBall
MinV olEllip
Fig. 3. Moving target and feasible sets containing the locat ion of
target nodes via outer approximation and upper bound concep t. The
black dashed line shows the trajectory of the moving target.
node. Simulation results show that the proposed bound is
relatively tight in many situations.
REFERENCES
[1] H. Celebi, I. Guvenc, S. Gezici, and H. Arslan, “Cognitiv e-radio
systems for spectrum, location, and environmental awarene ss,”
IEEE Antennas and Propagation Magazine , vol. 52, no. 4, pp.
41–61, 2010.
[2] G. Mao and B. Fidan, Localization Algorithms and Strategies
for Wireless Sensor Networks . Information Science reference,
Hershey. New York, 2009.
[3] A. H. Sayed, A. Tarighat, and N. Khajehnouri, “Network-b ased
wireless location: challenges faced in developing techniq ues for
accurate wireless location information,” IEEE Signal Process.
Mag., vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 24–40, Jul. 2005.
[4] S. Gezici, “A survey on wireless position estimation,” Wireless
Personal Communications, vol. 44, no. 3, pp. 263–282, Feb. 2008.
[5] S. Gezici, Z. Tian, G. B. Giannakis, H. Kobayashi, A. F. Mo lisch,
H. V . Poor, and Z. Sahinoglu, “Localization via ultra-wideb and
radios: A look at positioning aspects for future sensor netw orks,”
IEEE Signal Process. Mag. , vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 70–84, Jul. 2005.
[6] M. R. Gholami, E. G. Str¨ om, H. Wymeersch, and M. Rydstr¨ o m,
“On geometric upper bounds for positioning algorithms in wireless
sensor networks,” Signal Processing, vol. 111, pp. 179–193, 2015.
[7] M. R. Gholami, E. G. Str¨ om, H. Wymeersch, and S. Gezici,
“Upper bounds on position error of a single location estimat e
in wireless sensor networks,” EURASIP Journal on Advances in
Signal Processing, vol. 2014:4, no. 1, 2014.
[8] R. M. Vagheﬁ, M. R. Gholami, and E. G. Str¨ om, “Bearing-on ly
target localization with uncertainties in observer position,” in Proc.
IEEE International Symposium on Personal, Indoor and Mobil e
Radio Communications (PIMRC) , September 2010, pp. 238–242.
[9] M. Gavish and A. J. Weiss, “Performance analysis of beari ng-only
target location algorithms,” IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and
Electronic Systems, vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 817–828, 1992.
[10] Y . He, A. Behnad, and X. Wang, “Accuracy analysis of the
two-reference-node angle-of-arrival localization syste m,” IEEE
Wireless Communications Letters, 2015.
[11] Y . Censor and S. A. Zenios, Parallel Optimization: Theory,
Algorithms, and Applications . Oxford Unversity Press, New
York, 1997.
[12] M. R. Gholami, M. Rydstr¨ om, and E. G. Str¨ om, “Position ing of
node using plane projection onto convex sets,” in Proc. IEEE
Wireless Communication and Networking Conference (WCNC) ,
Apr. 2010.
[13] D. P. Palomar and Y . C. Eldar, Convex Optimization in Signal
Processing and Communications . Cambridge University Press,
2010.
[14] A. Ben-Tal and A. Nemirovski, “Lectures on modern conve x
optimization,” 2012. [Online]. Available: http://www2.isye.gatech.
edu/∼nemirovs/Lect ModConvOpt.pdf
[15] S. Boyd, L. E. Ghaoui, E. Feron, and V . Balakrishnan, Linear
Matrix Inequalities in Systems and Control Theory . SIAM,
Philadelphia, PA, June 1994, vol. 15 of Studies in Applied
Mathematics.
[16] S. Boyd and L. Vandenberghe, Convex Optimization. Cambridge
University Press, 2004.
[17] K. Ho and Y . Chan, “An asymptotically unbiased estimato r for
bearings-only and doppler-bearing target motion analysis ,” IEEE
Trans. Signal Process., vol. 54, no. 3, pp. 809–822, Mar. 2006.