IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 27, NO. 2, APRIL 2011 313
On the Time to Search for an Intermittent Signal
Source Under a Limited Sensing Range
Dezhen Song, Senior Member, IEEE, Chang-Young Kim, and Jingang Yi, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—A mobile robot with a limited sensing range is de-
ployed to search for a stationary target that intermittently emits
short duration signals. The searching mission is accomplished as
soon as the robot receives a signal from the target. We propose
the expected searching time (EST) as a primary metric to evaluate
different robot motion plans under different robot conﬁgurations.
To illustrate the proposed metric, we present two case studies. In
the ﬁrst case, we analyze two common motion plans: a slap method
(SM) and a random walk (RW). The EST analysis shows that the
SM is asymptotically faster than the RW when the searching space
size increases. In the second case, we compare a team ofn homoge-
neous low-cost robots with a super robot that has the sensing range
equal to that of the summation of then robots. Our analysis shows
that the low-cost robot team takes Θ(1 /n) time, while the super
robot takes Θ(1 /√ n) time as n →∞ . Our metrics successfully
demonstrate their ability in assessing the searching performance.
The analytical results are also conﬁrmed in simulation and physical
experiments.
Index Terms —Coverage, intermittent signal source, mobile
robots, searching time.
I. I NTRODUCTION
M
OBILE robots are often employed to perform searching
tasks, such as ﬁnding a black box in a remote area after
an airplane crash, searching for victims after an earthquake or a
mine collapse disaster, or locating artifacts on the ocean ﬂoor. In
many cases, the target can intermittently emit short duration sig-
nals to assist with the search. For example, an airplane black box
transmits radio signals periodically. An earthquake victim may
knock rubble from time to time. The searching task is accom-
plished once the robot detects the signal emitted by the target.
However, the robot usually has a limited sensing range. It seems
straightforward that we can use the traditional coverage-based
motion plans to guide the robot to cyclically scan the searching
space to locate the target. However, the time to search for the tar-
get is inherently random and, hence, remains unknown despite
its importance in many searching and rescue applications.
Manuscript received June 10, 2010; revised October 13, 2010; accepted
December 6, 2010. Date of publication January 20, 2011; date of current ver-
sion April 7, 2011. This paper was recommended for publication by Associate
Editor S. Carpin and Editor L. Parker upon evaluation of the reviewers’ com-
ments. This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation
under CAREER Grant IIS-0643298 and Grant MRI-0923203.
D. Song and C. Kim are with Department of Computer Science and En-
gineering, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843 USA (e-mail:
dzsong@cse.tamu.edu; kcyoung@cse.tamu.edu).
J. Yi is with the Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, Rut-
gers University, Piscataway, NJ 08854 USA (e-mail: jgyi@rutgers.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the ﬁgures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TRO.2010.2099391
To address this new problem, we propose the expected search-
ing time (EST) as a primary metric to assess the searching ability
of a robot or a robot team. We model the searching process as
a delayed renewal reward process [1] and derive the EST as
a function of the searching space size, the signal transmission
rate, and the robot sensing range. The resultant closed-form
solution of the metrics can be used to analyze the searching ef-
ﬁciency for different robot conﬁgurations and searching plans.
Since the model components can be obtained from online mea-
surements and known robot parameters, a great beneﬁt of the
resulting model is its capability of predicting the EST for an
ongoing searching process. This characteristic is important for
time-critical searching and rescue applications. The analytical
results are conﬁrmed in simulation and physical experiments.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We begin
with the related work in Section II. We deﬁne the problem in
Section III. We derive the EST in a closed form in Section IV.
The two case studies are presented in Section V. The analytical
results are validated in simulation and physical experiments in
Section VI before we conclude the paper.
II. R ELATED WORK
Searching for an object in physical space is one of the most
important tasks for robots or humans. When prior information
such as the spatial distribution of the target is known, this is com-
parable with the foraging behavior of animals [2]. For this case,
the searching problem is actually a nonlinear optimization prob-
lem in operations research [3] with searching time/path length
as objective functions. If the searching space is a graph, Trum-
mel and Weisinger show this is an nondeterministic polynomial
time-hard problem [4].
However, prior target information is often not available. If
the target is continuously emitting signals, just simply scanning
the entire searching space once enables the robot to ﬁnd the tar-
get. Since the maximum searching time is the time to cover the
entire searching space, the searching problem becomes a cov-
erage problem [5]–[7]. For a known environment, a coverage
problem for a single robot often employs different approaches
to decompose the searching space and output a continuous path
that allows the robot to cover the entire searching space. If the
searching space can be modeled as a set of w-disjoint discrete
choices, searching for a target with a limited sensing range and
w-choice is known as aw-lane cow-path problem [8]. For cover-
age problems over a small region and considering scene topolo-
gies, the problem can be reduced to the art gallery (AG) problem
in computational geometry [9], [10]. In Euclidean space, if the
coverage strategy is to linearly partition the searching space to
form a connected path, this is known as the slap method (SM)
1552-3098/$26.00 © 2011 IEEE
314 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 27, NO. 2, APRIL 2011
or the trapezoid method [11], [12]. Independently, this method
is regarded as a type of linear search problems in the applied
math and operations research societies [13].
While the searching time is well understood for the cover-
age problems [14], [15], this is not the case when the searching
process depends on the signal emitted by the target because
the collocation of the robot and the target does not necessar-
ily mean that the target is found. Benkoski et al. [16] clas-
sify searching problems into two categories: stationary tar-
gets and moving targets. Our problem deals with stationary
targets. However, Benkoski’s classiﬁcation does not include
cases that the target emits transmit signals, which is different
from the one-sided search on which Benkoski’s classiﬁcation is
based.
Another set of related work is robot exploration and mapping
problems, where the environment is not previously known [17].
The task is not only to cover the entire space but to output the
true representations of the environment as well. Recent advances
in using a multirobot team to perform exploration and mapping
tasks mainly focuses on the coordination of the robot/sensor
team [18]–[21] under various dynamics, communication, sens-
ing, and energy constraints. Although not directly applicable to
our problem, researchers have accumulated interesting empir-
ical results: Using a team of low-cost robots usually performs
faster and more fault-tolerant [22] than a single expensive robot
(ASER). This really inspires our problem because we want to
see if our analytical model can show similar results under similar
constraints/conditions.
Our group has built experience in searching for targets that in-
termittently transmit signals by developing algorithms and sys-
tems to detect an unknown wireless sensor network [23]–[25].
In these problems, the robot can accumulate the information
about the target location over time through the signal strength
readings and antenna models. The searching problem is less
difﬁcult because the robot can utilize the information in the
planning process. However, such information is often not avail-
able in many searching tasks, which is the focus of this pa-
per. This paper extends our previous conference paper [26] by
adding spatiotemporal sensory coverage (SSC) metric analysis
and physical experiment results.
III. P ROBLEM DEFINITION
As illustrated in Fig. 1, a single robot searches for a single
target in a squared 2-D Euclidean space with a side length ofa.
Let us deﬁne ds as the maximum sensing distance of the sensor
on the robot. The robot travels at the constant speed of v.T o
formulate the problem and focus on the most relevant issues, we
make the following assumptions.
1) There is no prior information about possible locations of
the target. Therefore, the target is assumed to be uniformly
distributed in the searching space.
2) The target transmits short duration signals periodically
according to a Poisson process with a known rate λ.T h e
signal duration is short due to energy concerns. A Poisson
process is a good approximation to a general random ar-
rival process in stochastic modeling [1]. In some cases, the
Fig. 1. Robot attempts to search for a target (the red dot) that intermittently
emits short duration signals in a square. The gray circle is the region that the
robot can sense the signal from the target. The dashed line is a robot trajectory.
target may be a continuous beacon, but it is very difﬁcult
to be detected due to environment conditions or unreli-
able sensing, which can also be modeled as a target with
intermittent signals.
3) During the searching process, the target is static. The
searching space is much larger than the sensing distance:
a ≫ ds .
Condition 1 (Sensing condition): The robot cannot sense the
signal unless an actively transmitting target is within distance
ds due to the sensing range limit.
As illustrated in Fig. 1, Condition 1 deﬁnes a circle cen-
tered at the target with the radius of ds , which is the region
that robot has a chance to sense the target. We refer to the
region as “the circle” in the rest of the paper. Due to the
fact that the robot does not know the location of the target,
the actual position of the circle in the searching space is also
unknown.
Condition 2 (Termination condition): The searching task is
accomplished as soon as the robot senses a signal sent by the
target.
Condition 2 implies that the robot cannot ﬁnd an inactive
target even it is collocated with the target. For example, an
airplane is not be able to notice the survivor on an island if the
person does not send a signal (e.g., ﬁre or smoke). However,
only one signal reception is needed in the searching process.
Conditions 1 and 2 establish a new type of searching problem
as oppose to a regular coverage problem. Let us deﬁneTs as the
searching time for the robot to ﬁnd the target. Therefore, our
problem is deﬁned as follows.
Problem Statement 1 (EST computation): Given λ, ds , and
a, calculate the EST E(Ts), where E(·) denotes the expected
value function.
IV . MODELING
One immediate question about Problem Statement 1 is
whether we can obtain the EST without referring to or being
limited to a particular motion plan. To address this dependency,
we ﬁrst characterize the motion plans based on their outcomes
before modeling the EST.
SONG et al.: ON THE TIME TO SEARCH FOR AN INTERMITTENT SIGNAL SOURCE UNDER A LIMITED SENSING RANGE 315
A. Renewal Process and Characterizing Planners
Periodically, the robot trajectory planner outputs a motion
plan and the robot executes the plan during the searching pro-
cess. The system is naturally a repetitive scanning process dur-
ing which the robot enters and leaves the circle until Condition
1 is satisﬁed. During the probabilistic nature, the process is a
random process with a stopping time.
The repetitiveness in coverage can be modeled as a re-
newal process [1]. Letting interarrival time Xm denote the
time between the (m − 1)st and mth event, a renewal pro-
cess can be viewed as a generalization of Poisson process with
{Xm ,m =1 ,2,... } being independently and identically dis-
tributed (i.i.d.) random variables. Note that the distributions of
Xm can be any type but must be i.i.d.
To facilitate our analysis, we partition the continuous trajec-
tory of the robot into many repetitive i.i.d. tours.
Deﬁnition 1: A tour starts or restarts at the moment when the
robot ﬁrst enters the target circle during the single independent
scanning.
The dashed line in Fig. 1 illustrates a tour. Tours may be quite
different depending upon the planner. For example, tour length
varies each time if the robot follows a random walk (RW). As
another example, a deterministic planner usually has a ﬁxed
tour trajectory. An event happens when each tour starts. The
tour length are the interarrival time of events.
Based on Condition 2, we know that the robot does not ac-
cumulate the knowledge regarding the target location from one
tour to another tour because no signal has been perceived be-
fore the moment the searching mission is accomplished. Note
that a tour can contain multiple intersections with the circle
in a general case. Tour deﬁnition is a way of partitioning
the trajectory and does not have to be synchronized exactly
with how the robot planner works. Hence, each tour length is
i.i.d. as long as the motion planner does not change its plan-
ning algorithm. Therefore, the searching process as a renewal
process.
During each tour, the robot spends some time inside the circle
and some time outside the circle, which are deﬁned as τIN and
τOUT , respectively. Hence, τIN + τOUT is the overall duration
for the tour.
The characteristics of renewal process allows us to compute
its limiting properties by focusing on individual periods. For
example, we immediately know that the long run probability of
being inside the circle is τIN /(τIN + τOUT ) from the property
of renewal processes.
If the trajectory only intersects the circle once in each period,
when a tour begins, the robot ﬁrst spends τIN inside the cir-
cle followed τOUT outside the circle. This yields an alternating
renewal process. If there are many intersections between the
circle and the tour, then τIN and τOUT are not two continuous
time segments but a summation of many fragmented segments,
which can be computed by conditioning on the number of inter-
sections. For simplicity of analysis and due to the limited space,
we will focus on the single intersection case in the rest of paper.
Readers can follow our methods to analyze multiple intersection
cases.
B. Modeling the EST
Without loss of generality, we assume the robot starts the
searching process from the origin which is on the boundaries
of the searching space. It takes some time to reach the circle
where the ﬁrst tour starts. Let us deﬁne the time as delay D.
From Conditions 1 and 2, we know that the robot cannot ﬁnd
the target in D. The searching process is a delayed alternating
renewal process. DeﬁneTc
s as the time to ﬁnd the target after the
robot enters the repetitive tours. Hence, the EST is as follows:
E(Ts)= E(D)+ E(Tc
s ). (1)
Deﬁne N as the number of signal transmissions during τIN
in a tour. Since the arrival process of the signal transmission is
Poisson, N conforms to a Poisson distribution
P(N = k)= e−λτIN (λτIN )k
k! ,k =0 ,1,2,..., ∞ . (2)
We know that eventN> 0 means that at least one signal trans-
mission happens during τIN . This means the target is found.
Therefore, we can compute E(Tc
s ) by conditioning on N
E(Tc
s )= E(Tc
s |N> 0)P(N> 0) +E(Tc
s |N =0 )P(N =0 )
(3)
where P(N> 0) = 1 − e−λτIN and P(N =0 )= e−λτIN ac-
cording to (2). Note that N< 0 is not possible due to the fact
that N is a counting variable.
Now let us compute E(Tc
s |N> 0). Since event N> 0 is
equivalent to eventTc
s ≤ τIN ,w eh a v e
E(Tc
s |N> 0) = E(Tc
s |Tc
s ≤ τIN )= 1
λ − τIN e−λτIN
1 − e−λτIN
(4)
because the conditional distribution Tc
s |Tc
s ≤ τIN is a truncated
exponential distribution [1], [27]. It is worth noting that (4) is
valid only if τIN > 0, which is guaranteed according to Deﬁni-
tion 1. However, we know
E(Tc
s |N =0 )= τIN + τOUT + E(Tc
s ) (5)
because the robot cannot ﬁnd the inactive target in the current
tour and has to start all over again in next tour.
Plugging (4) and (5) into (3) and (1), we have the following
result.
Theorem 1: Given the expected time E(D) for the robot to
reach the circle, the Poisson arrival rate λ of target signals, the
traveling timeτIN inside the circle, and the traveling timeτOUT
outside the circle, then the EST of the target is as follows:
E(Ts |τIN ,τOUT )= E(D)+ 1
λ + τOUT
e−λτIN
1 − e−λτIN
. (6)
This is a conditional expectation becauseτIN and τOUT are often
random variables. SinceE(D) and λare independent ofτIN and
τOUT , the unconditional EST can be obtained as follows:
E(Ts)= E(D)+ 1
λ + E
(
τOUT
e−λτIN
1 − e−λτIN
)
. (7)
The formulation of EST given in Theorem 1 has a surpris-
ingly succinct format revealing the relationship between the
316 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 27, NO. 2, APRIL 2011
Fig. 2. (a) Sample motion plan for the SM. (b) How a tour (line l) intersects
the circle of the target.
EST and the corresponding variables. To further explain (7), let
us consider the following extreme cases.
Case 1: When λ →∞ , it means that the target continuously
transmits signals. The searching time becomes the time that it
takes for the robot to enter the circle. The problem degenerates
to the traditional coverage problem, where E(Ts)= E(D).
Case 2: When τOUT =0 , it means that the signal emitted
by the target is so powerful that the circle deﬁned by ds can
cover the entire searching space. In this case,E(D)=0 . Hence,
E(Ts)=1 /λ, the mean interarrival time of signals. The robot
ﬁnds the target as soon as the target emits a signal.
Remark 1: It is worth noting that (7) does not depend on a
particular motion plan or the shape/dimension of the searching
space, which makes it widely applicable in practice. Indeed,
the EST can be also applied to analyze searching tasks carried
by humans. In many cases, the signal transmission rate λ is
known; E(D) can be estimated based on observations; τIN can
be estimated based on ds and v; and τOUT can be measured
based on observations that how often a robot would revisit a
region with the same size of the circle. Based on the known
information and online measurements, we can even predict the
EST for an ongoing searching process regardless its motion
plan, which is of great importance in applications, where the
searching time literally means life or death.
V. A NALYSIS OF COMMON SEARCHING STRATEGIES
Theorem 1 can be used to analyze the searching performance
under different robot motion plans and conﬁgurations. We begin
with demonstrating how Theorem 1 can reveal the difference
between two motion plans from common coverage methods:
the SM and the RW.
A. Slap Method Versus the Random Walk
1) Slap Method: Also known as the trapezoidal decomposi-
tion [11], [12] in robotics research, SM sequentially scans the en-
tire searching space back and forth. Fig. 2(a) illustrates the robot
motion plan for the square case. The plan is a set ofy-axis paral-
lel lines [appears as vertical lines in Fig. 2(a)] that cover the en-
tire searching space. The vertical lines are interconnected using
the boundaries of the searching space to formulate a complete
tour. To guarantee an intersection between the circle and the tour,
the distance between adjacent vertical lines is set to be 2ds .
The red “ ⋆” in Fig. 2(a) indicates the starting point of the
tour. Since tours are exactly the same in the SM, the subsequent
tours start exactly at the same location. The overall tour length
is approximately a2/(2ds). Given the robot speed v,i tt a k e s
τIN + τOUT ≈ a2
2vds
(8)
time for the robot to ﬁnish the tour. Since the target could be
anywhere in the searching space with equal probabilities, we
obtain
E(D) ≈ (τIN + τOUT )
2 = a2
4vds
. (9)
To use the result in Theorem 1, the remaining undetermined
variable is τIN . Let us deﬁne DIN as the distance traveled in-
side the circle. DIN is the length of intersection when the line
intersects the circle, as illustrated in Fig. 2(b). Here, we ignore
the boundary effect, where the circle is not a full circle because
a ≫ ds .L i n el in Fig. 2(b) is a part of the tour. Whenl intersects
the circle, we deﬁne Dl as the distance between the center of
the circle and the line. Since the target is uniformly distributed
in the 2-D space, Dl ∼ U(0,ds) is uniformly distributed. From
Fig. 2(b), we know
τIN = DIN
v = 2
√
d2s − D2
l
v . (10)
Plugging (8)–(10) into (7) and conditioning on Dl ,w eh a v e
E(Ts |Dl) ≈ a2
4vds
+ 1
λ +
(
a2
2vds
− 2
√
d2s − D2
l
v
)
φ(λ,Dl)
(11)
where
φ(λ,Dl)= 1
e2λ√
d2s −D2
l /v − 1
. (12)
Since a ≫ ds , τOUT ≫ τIN , and 2
√
d2s − D2
l /v is negligible if
compared with a2/2vds ,w eh a v e
E(Ts |Dl) ≈ a2
4vds
+ 1
λ + a2
2vds
φ(λ,Dl). (13)
Hence, we have the EST for the SM
E(Ts)=
∫ ds
δ=0
E(Ts |Dl = δ) 1
ds
dδ
≈ a2
4vds
+ 1
λ + a2
2vds
g(ds,λ)
where
g(ds,λ)= E(φ(λ,Dl)) =
∫ ds
δ=0
1
ds
φ(λ,δ)dδ. (15)
Let δ= ds cos θ, we can transform (15) into
g(ds,λ)=
∫ π/2
θ=0
1
e2λds sin θ/v − 1
sin θdθ. (16)
Whenλandds/v are very small, (15) can be further simpliﬁed
g(ds,λ) ≈ πv
4λds
− 1. (17)
Remark 2: Equation (14) suggests that a fast robot (large v)
with great sensing distance ds reduces the EST. This conclu-
sion agrees with our intuition that mobility and sensing are the
SONG et al.: ON THE TIME TO SEARCH FOR AN INTERMITTENT SIGNAL SOURCE UNDER A LIMITED SENSING RANGE 317
Fig. 3. Robot motion plan based on a 2-D lattice-based RW. Two types of
tours are illustrated here. (a) Closed tour. (b) Unclosed tour.
key elements in searching. However, it also takes the target’s
cooperation to further reduce the EST. When the robot reaches
its speed and sensing limit, the only way to reduce EST is to
increase λ. Of course, the target usually has energy constraints
and cannot arbitrarily increase λ.
The analysis assumes the distance between vertical lines is
2ds , which ensures there is only one intersection between the
circle and the tour. When a smaller spacing is used, the overall
tour length increases, and so does τIN . The analysis is slightly
more complicated because it needs to be conditioned on the
number of intersections between the tour and the circle. The
results actually share a similar format with (13) and the same
asymptotic properties with respect toa, v, andλ. Since our focus
is to compare the asymptotic behavior of the SM with that of
the RW, we omit the analysis here.
In the earlier calculation, we ignore the boundary effect on
the ﬁnal result. When the circle is located at the boundary of the
square, distance DIN cannot be computed using (10). Since the
target has to be located within ds distance of the boundary for
the boundary case, the probability that such an event happens
is less than 4dsa/a2 =4 ds/a ≪ 1, since ds ≪ a. Hence, its
impact to the ﬁnal EST is negligible because DIN for such a
case is not signiﬁcantly different from that of the nonboundary
case. Therefore, we will ignore boundary effect in the rest of the
paper.
2) Random Walk: Another popular motion plan is to employ
a 2-D RW to traverse the searching space. As illustrated in Fig. 3,
we partition the entire searching space using a 2-D ﬁnite lattice
with a spacing of 2ds in each dimension. Denoting Ns as the
number of lattice nodes, we have Ns = a2/4d2
s nodes. A ﬁner
lattice is possible but usually associated with higher energy cost
because the robot has to make a lot more turns.
The robot always moves from one lattice node to its neighbor-
ing node with equal probabilities. The robot does not cross the
boundaries. According to [28], this is a ﬁnite 2-D lattice with
reﬂective boundaries. Recall that a tour starts at the moment
the robot enters the circle. Since the robot might not enter the
circle at the exactly same location in different tours, each tour
is not necessarily a completely closed curve as that in the SM
case. The closed curve tour in Fig. 3(a) only happens with a
probability of 1/4, whereas the unclosed tour in Fig. 3(b) has a
probability of 3/4.
To compute the EST given in (7), we need to computeE(D).
Recall that the robot always starts at origin. Given the location of
target (Xt,Yt), computing the mean time that it takes the robot
to follow the RW to reach a particular location (Xt,Yt) is the
mean ﬁrst passage time (MFPT) [29], [30] problem in stochastic
modeling. The exact solution to this problem is expressed in
the format of pseudo-Green functions and cannot be explicitly
analyzed. Since a ≫ ds , there are a large number of nodes
a2/4d2
s in the 2-D lattice, and each robot move takes 2ds/v
time. Hence, we can apply the recent results of MFPT using its
asymptotic format in [31]
E(D|Xt,Yt) ≈ a2
2vds
(
α0 + α1 ln
√
X2
t + Y 2
t
)
(18)
where α0 and α1 are constants and can be determined by Monte
Carlo methods. According to [31], α0 and α1 strikingly do not
depend on lattice size but on local transitional properties. Hence
E(D)=
∫ a
0
∫ a
0
E(D|Xt = x, Yt = y) 1
a2 dxdy (19)
≈ α0a2
2vds
+ α1
2vds
∫ a
0
∫ a
0
ln
√
x2 + y2dxdy. (20)
Since∫ a
0
∫ a
0
ln
√
x2 + y2dxdy = a2 lna + π+2l n2 − 6
4 a2
we have
E(D) ≈ a2
2vds
(
α0 + α1 lna + α1
π+2l n2 − 6
4
)
. (21)
The remaining unknown term in (7) is E(τOUT (e−λτIN )/
(1 − e−λτIN )). Given the robot speed v, τIN is uniquely deter-
mined by the distance in the circleDIN , which is independent of
the overall trajectory. In addition,E(τOUT ) ≈ E(τOUT + τIN ),
given that a ≫ ds . Hence
E
(
τOUT
e−λτIN
1 − e−λτIN
)
≈ E(τOUT + τIN )E
(
e−λτIN
1 − e−λτIN
)
.
(22)
Since the 2-D lattice-based RW is undirected and symmetric
in transitional probability, from [32], we know that the stationary
probability of visiting node i is πi = nd(i)/2me , where nd(i)
is the degrees of freedom of node i and me is the total number
of edges in the lattice. For a nonboundary node, nd(i)=4 and
me ≈ 4Ns . Hence
πi = 1
Ns
= 4d2
s
a2 .
Without loss of generality, we assume nodei is the node closest
to the target. This means that πi is the long run probability
that the robot intercepts the circle. Let (xi,yi) be the node i’s
position. Given nodei is the nearest node to the target and recall
target location is (Xt,Yt), then we know |xi − Xt |≤ ds and
|yi − Yt |≤ ds based on the lattice deﬁnition. Therefore, the
conditional probability that the robot is inside the circle, given
that node i is visited, is the area ratio between the circle and the
square with a side length of2ds : pc|i = πd2
s /4d2
s = π/4 because
318 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 27, NO. 2, APRIL 2011
Fig. 4. How the robot trajectory in solid line intersects the circle. (a) Scenario
1) When the nearest lattice point on tour is located outside the circle. (b) Scenario
2) When the nearest lattice point on tour is located inside the circle. The dashed
line in the ﬁgure is part of the lattice.
the target is uniformly distributed in the searching space. Hence,
the unconditional long run probability that the robot stays inside
the circle is pc = pc|iπi = πd2
s /a2 .
We can obtain the same long run probability using the
renewal-reward theorem [1] if we view τIN as the reward func-
tion for each period
E(τIN )
E(τOUT + τIN ) = pc = πd2
s
a2 . (23)
Plugging (23) into (22), we have
E
(
τOUT
e−λτIN
1 − e−λτIN
)
≈ a2
πd2s
E(τIN )E
(
e−λτIN
1 − e−λτIN
)
.
(24)
Now, we focus on the computation ofτIN . Since the lattice has
a spacing of2ds , two scenarios exist when the tour on the lattice
intersects the circle: 1) The next lattice point on the tour is inside
the circle, and 2) the next lattice point on the tour is outside the
circle, as illustrated in Fig. 4. Let us deﬁne events that scenarios
1) and 2) happen as events Ei and Eo , respectively. Since the
circle center is uniformly located in the searching space
P(Ei)= πd2
s
4d2s
= π
4 =1 − P(Eo). (25)
When event Eo happens, we know that the robot trajectory
intersects the circle as a straight line, as shown in Fig. 4(a).
Hence, we have
τIN |Eo = DIN
v (26)
where DIN is deﬁned in (10), and the right side of | is the
condition for the equality to be true. This is a notation convention
widely used in stochastic modeling [1]
E(τIN |Eo)= πds
2v (27)
E
(
e−λτIN
1 − e−λτIN
|Eo
)
= g(ds,λ). (28)
When event Ei happens, one lattice point is inside the circle.
As illustrated in Fig. 4(b), the lattice point inside the circle par-
titions the lattice edges inside the circle into four parts:l1,l2,l3 ,
and l4 . When a robot trajectory intersects the circle, the part of
the trajectory inside the circle can be divided into two segments,
which are deﬁned as L′ and L′′, respectively. L′ refers to the
segment that the robot takes to arrive at the lattice node and
L′′ refers to the segment that the robot takes to leave the circle.
Hence
τIN |Ei = L′ + L′′
v .
Since L′ and L′′ have equal probabilities to takel1 , l2 , l3 , andl4 ,
there is a total of24 =1 6 combinations. Conditioning on the 16
(L′,L ′′) combinations and the circle center location (Xt,Yt),
we obtain the same results, as shown in (27) and (28). Com-
bining those results for the Ei and Eo events by conditioning
on them, we have the unconditional expected values E(τIN )
and E
(
e−λτIN /(1 − e−λτIN )
)
coincidentally sharing the same
formats, as in (27) and (28), respectively. Plugging the two ex-
pectations, (21) and (24) into (7), we can obtain the EST for the
RW case
E(Ts) ≈ a2
2vds
(
α0 + α1 lna + α1
π+2l n2 − 6
4
)
+ 1
λ + a2
2dsvg(ds,λ). (29)
Comparing (29) with (14), we have the following conclusion.
Corollary 1: With the same square ﬁeld side length a,t h e
sensing range ds , and the signal transmission rate λ,t h eE S T
value of the SM is asymptotically smaller than that of the RW
when a →∞ .
Proof: It is straightforward because E(Ts)=Θ ( a2) for the
SM from (14), whileE(Ts)=Θ ( a2 lna) for the RW according
to (29). ■
So far, our analysis are limited to cases in open 2-D Euclidean
space. It is possible to extend the analysis to more general cases
if certain conditions are satisﬁed.
Remark 3: For 2-D space with obstacles: The 2-D space
must be fully connected. The trajectory generated by motion
planner should ensure the uniform coverage of the searching
space for the SM. For the RW, the lattice may not be regularly
shaped as in the paper. To ensure the long run uniform coverage,
the transitional probability at each node should be symmetric.
These conditions are common in many search tasks. When the
conditions are satisﬁed, then both Theorem 1 and Corollary 1
hold.
Remark 4: For 3-D cases: The target circle becomes the target
ball. Theorem 1 can be directly applied to 3-D cases, but the
analysis of the SM and the RW needs to be modiﬁed. For exam-
ple, the searching space size should be measured by its volume
instead of its area. The results for the 3-D SM and the 3-D RW
are different, but the overall approach should be similar. The ex-
tension should be straightforward. Since most searching tasks
are 2-D, we focus on 2-D cases in this paper.
Note that although slower than that of the SM, RW-based
methods have memoryless property and do not require complex
coordination and communication, which results in more and
cheaper robots. A comparison between cheap robot team and
ASER is the next goal.
SONG et al.: ON THE TIME TO SEARCH FOR AN INTERMITTENT SIGNAL SOURCE UNDER A LIMITED SENSING RANGE 319
B. Analysis of Different Robot Conﬁgurations
Theorem 1 can also be used to analyze cases under different
robot conﬁgurations. Here, we compare two conﬁgurations:
1) Low-cost robot team case: We have n identically con-
ﬁgured low-cost robots. To coordinate the searching, we
partition the searching space into n subsquare ﬁelds with
an area of a2/n each and allocate one robot for each sub-
square ﬁeld.
2) A single expensive robot case:We have an expensive robot
equipped with a highly capable sensor that has a sensing
area equal to the combination of those of the n low-cost
robots. If each of the low-cost robot has a sensing range
of ds , then the area of the combined sensing region for n
robots isnπd2
s provided that there is no overlap of sensing
region between any two robots. Therefore, the sensing dis-
tance for the expensive robot is set tod′
s = √nds to ensure
ASER has the area of sensing coverage that is no less than
that of low-cost robot team (LCRT) at any given time.
We are now ready to compare these two robot conﬁgurations.
Since the SM is asymptotically faster than the RW, we build on
the SM results in (29). For the LCRT, only one robot actually
has the target in its subﬁeld. Hence, the rest ofn − 1 robots are
irrelevant in the searching process. Compared with the original
EST in (29), we just need to replacea with a/√n. Deﬁning the
searching time for the LCRT as T ′
s ,w eh a v e
E(T ′
s) ≈ a2
4vnds
+ 1
λ + a2
2vnds
g(ds,λ). (30)
Deﬁning the searching time for the ASER as T ′′
s ,w eh a v e
E(T ′′
s ) ≈ a2
4v√nds
+ 1
λ + a2
2v√nds
g(√nds,λ). (31)
From (16), it is straightforward to see that
g(√nds,λ) → 0 as n →∞ . (32)
Therefore, we have the following conclusion.
Corollary 2:When traveling at the same velocityv, the LCRT
can ﬁnd the target asymptotically faster than the ASER does
when n increases, if 1/λ is not the dominating factor in the
EST.
Proof: From (31) and (32), we know E(T ′′
s ) = Θ(1/√n +
1/λ). From (30), we knowE(T ′
s) = Θ(1/n +1 /λ). Hence, the
conclusion follows. ■
If we use RW in comparing LCRT and ASER, Corollary 2
still holds. We skip the analysis because the EST of RW shares
a similar format of that of the SM and the proof is similar as
well. Note that the conclusion is established based on the circular
sensing region, the result would be different if a different sensing
topology is used.
Remark 5: This analysis also shows that if there are cost
functions associated with the number of robots, different sen-
sor options, or different velocity options available, we can use
the EST results as an objective function to optimize the robot
conﬁguration for the task.
The result in Corollary 2 is actually not very intuitive at the
ﬁrst sight. We have not expected such a signiﬁcant difference in
Fig. 5. Linear SSC during a unit time.
the comparison. This conclusion is rather interesting because it
shows that an expensive robot with superior sensing capability
is not as good as a large number of low-cost robots with less
capable sensors when searching for targets that intermittently
transmits short duration signals.
A more intuitive explanation of the result in Corollary 2 is
that the ability of searching is directly determined by SSC of
the moving robot.
Deﬁnition 2: Given the robot travels at a speed of v with a
sensory radius of ds , SSC is measured by the area of the swept
region per unit time aSSC .
For example
aSSC = πd2
s +2 dsv (33)
for a robot travels along a line (see Fig. 5). For a LCRT with the
SM-based trajectories, SSC is the summation of n nonoverlap-
ping robots: πnd2
s +2 ndsv. However, SSC for the correspond-
ing ASER becomes πnd2
s +2 √ndsv, which is less than that of
LCRT. This is consistent with the result in Corollary 2.
When the robot does not travel along a line during the unitary
time, its SSC becomes inevitably smaller than that in (33). For
example, during the RW, the robot makes a lot more turns than
that of the SM, which decreases SSC over the course of searching
and results in a longer EST, as shown in Corollary 1.
The SSC analysis can also be used to predict the behavior
of two different RW setups for the robot team. In the afore-
mentioned LCRT setup, we partition the searching space inton
equally sized subareas, which is deﬁned as LCRT-P-RW with
P-RW stands for the partition-based RW. As we know, the EST
of LCRT-P-RW is longer than that of LCRT with the SM, which
is abbreviated as LCRT-SM. Another possible way of coordinat-
ing n RW-based robots is that we do not partition the searching
space but release all n robots at the same origin and let them
compete. The searching stops when any robot ﬁnds the target.
We name the method as LCRT-C-RW, where C-RW stands for
the competition-based RW. For the LCRT-C-RW process, we
can compute EST using order statistic [33], since the searching
time is the smallest of n i.i.d. random variables. Although the
resulting EST can be obtained either analytically or computa-
tionally [34], it cannot be expressed in a simple closed-form
format for comparison study. We will not elaborate the pro-
cess. However, the introduction of SSC can quickly compare
LCRT-C-RW to LCRT-P-RW:
Lemma 1: The expected SSC of the LCRT-P-RW is always
larger than that of the LCRT-C-RW.
Proof: In the LCRT-C-RW process, there is a nonzero proba-
bility po that the sensing region between robots overlaps, which
reduces its effective SSC, whereas the LCRT-P-RW does not
320 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 27, NO. 2, APRIL 2011
Fig. 6. Simulation results in (a)–(d) for validating Theorem 1 with respect to a, λ, ds ,a n dv, respectively. SM stands for the slap method. RW stands for the
RW. Model means the model prediction of the EST. Meas. means the measured mean searching time. (e) Simulation results for comparing four different rob ot
conﬁgurations. Recall that LCRT stands for the low-cost robot team and ASER stands for a single expensive robot.
allow the overlap to happen. Let us deﬁne aSSC −P and aSSC −C
as the SSC for LCRT-P-RW and LCRT-C-RW, respectively.
Denote ϵa as the reduction of SSC caused by the overlap. Con-
ditioning on the overlapping event E′,w eh a v e
E(aSSC −C)= E(aSSC −C |E′)(1 − po)+ E(aSSC −C |E′)po
= E(aSSC −P)(1 − po)+( E(aSSC −P) − E(ϵa))po
<E (aSSC −P) (34)
since ϵa is positive. ■
Remark 6: This result indicates that the searching efﬁciency
of LCRT-C-RW is not as good as LCRT-P-RW. Actually, the
combination of EST and SSC analyses can help us to identify
the most efﬁcient coordination strategy with respect to different
searching space partition, robot allocation, or robot formation
methods for the robot team. Two interesting observations can
be summarized here.
1) For the robot trajectory, try to search in straight lines to
maximize the SSC. An optimal control problem can be
formulated if searching directions are forced to change
due to searching space constraints.
2) For the robot team, try to avoid overlapping among search-
ing regions of robots. Partitioning the searching space is
a good practice. We could also use a particular formation
to achieve this.
VI. E XPERIMENTS
We test our results using Monte Carlo simulation and physical
experiments.
A. Simulation
Simulation allows us to examine theoretical results across
complete parameter ranges without the limitation of hardware
conditions. The simulation results are illustrated in Fig. 6(a)–(e).
TABLE I
PARAMETER SETTINGS FOR RESULTS IN SIMULATION
AND PHYSICAL EXPERIMENTS
Each data point in those ﬁgures is an average of 10 000 inde-
pendent trials. At the beginning of each trial, we reset the robot
position to be at(0,0) and generate the target location according
to a 2-D uniform distribution. We then run the robot according
to the selected motion plan and ﬁnish the trial as soon as the
target is found.
1) Validating Theorem 1 and Corollary 1: We test Theorem
1 using both the SM and the RW because Theorem 1 is supposed
to be independent of motion plans. The simulation is set up with
different a, λ, ds , and v settings in Table I. In each setting,
we collect both the model predicted EST and the measured
mean searching time. The measured mean searching time is
the average of the searching time over the 10 000 trials [the
“Meas.” values in Fig. 6(a)–(d)]. The model predicted ESTs,
which are the “Model” values in Fig. 6, refer to the predicted
ESTs according to the measured D, λ, τIN , and τOUT values
in the experiment. In other words, we record their values and
average them over the 10 000 trials to obtain the estimation of
1/λ, E(D), andE(τOUT (e−λτIN )/(1 − e−λτIN )). We then feed
them into (7) to obtain the model prediction of the EST.
As illustrated in Fig. 6(a)–(d), the model prediction is consis-
tent with the measured mean searching time under all settings.
The curve trends with respect to a, λ, ds , and v in Fig. 6(a)–
(d) are also consistent with our analysis in (14) and (29). The
SONG et al.: ON THE TIME TO SEARCH FOR AN INTERMITTENT SIGNAL SOURCE UNDER A LIMITED SENSING RANGE 321
Fig. 7. (a) Mobile robot used in the experiment. (b) Xbee Pro RF module used
as the signal source, which is the target. (c) RF radiation pattern of the Xbee
Pro. This plot is from the product speciﬁcation sheet of Digi International Inc.
This is also the shape of the real-sensing region.
EST increases as the ﬁeld side length a increases. The EST de-
creases as λ, ds , and v increase. All ﬁgures show that the RW
is slower than the SM. In particular, Fig. 6(a) is consistent with
the asymptotic difference in Corollary 1.
2) Validating Corollary 2 and Lemma 1: We have also im-
plemented different LCRT and ASER robot conﬁgurations.
Again, the parameter settings are in the Table I. The measured
ESTs for both the conﬁgurations are shown in Fig. 6(e). It is
clear that the EST for the LCRT-SM is always much smaller than
that of the ASER-SM. This is consistent with Corollary 2. In
addition, the EST for the LCRT-P-RW is always much smaller
than that of the LCRT-C-RW, which is consistent with Lemma
1. What is interesting is the fact that the EST of the LCRT-P-
RW is initially bigger than that of the ASER-SM but becomes
smaller than that of the ASER-SM asn increases. The curves in
the ﬁgure also show the general trend that the EST decreases as
the n increases. This is consistent with our analysis. In addition,
as n becomes large, the curve levels at a nonzero value. This
indicates that the signal transmission rate dominates the search-
ing time in this case. Hence, it is not desirable to arbitrarily
increase n because the marginal beneﬁt would decrease. Actu-
ally, with an appropriate cost function, readers can extend the
analysis to ﬁnd an optimal number of robots for a given search-
ing task. This would be very meaningful in resource-constrained
searching process.
B. Physical Experiments
1) Hardware and Experiment Setup: In the physical experi-
ment, we use a mobile robot to search for a buried intermittent
radio beacon (see Fig. 7). This process emulates the search of a
black box after a plane crash. The robot is custom made in our
laboratory. The robot measures 50 × 47 × 50 cm3 in size. The
robot has two front drive wheels and one rear cast wheel and
uses a typical differential driving structure. During the experi-
ment, the robot traveling speed is set at 20 cm/s. The maximum
robot operation time between recharging is 4 h. Buried under the
Fig. 8. Physical experiment settings for the “accelerated” conﬁguration. (a)
Shaded area covers the circle. (b) Close-up view of the experiment setup for the
shaded area and the overhead camera.
ﬂoor, the target is a Zigbee radio source, which is an XBee Pro
node [see Fig. 7(b)] with a chip antenna from Digi International
Inc. (formerly known as MaxStream Inc). We program the radio
to allow it to transmit one packet every 10 s (λ=0 .1).
One notable difference between the simulation and the phys-
ical experiment is the shape of the sensing region. Although the
radio antennas are omnidirectional, the radiation pattern [see
Fig. 7(c)] is irregular. The shape of the radiation pattern is the
shape of the sensing region. Sincea = 100 m in our settings, we
decrease antenna sensitivity to ensurea ≫ ds . After calibration
and adjusting antenna sensitivity, we approximate the recep-
tion region with a circle (ds =0 .2 m). The physical experiment
parameters are summarized in Table I.
Since the robot has a slow speed and a small sensing region,
recall that the ﬁeld size is 104 m2 , it is estimated that it takes
the robot at least 106 s to ﬁnd the target. However, the robot
only has 4-h continuous operation time due to our hardware
limitations. When the robot travels outside the sensing region,
it cannot receive signals and does not provide information for
the searching process. Therefore, we setup the experiment in
an “accelerated” conﬁguration. In this conﬁguration, we do not
drive the robot according to the motion plan when the robot is
far away from the signal source. Instead, we fast forward the
time to the next moment that the robot is close to the signal
source. Fig. 8 illustrates the setup. The shaded area in Fig. 8(a)
is the region, which is a square with a side length of 4ds .T h e
region fully encloses the sensing region as shown in the ﬁgure.
The robot obtains its location from an overhead camera, as
illustrated in Fig. 8(b). The overhead camera is an Arecont
Vision 3100 networked video camera. The camera recognizes
color markers on the top of the robot, and computes the robot
position and orientation subsequently. Conﬁgured at a 640 ×
480-pixel resolution, it is capable of reaching an accuracy of
±2.0 cm with 16 Hz frame rate.
We ﬁrst validate Corollary 1 in the physical experiment. The
results are summarized in Fig. 9. Each entry is an average of
100 trials. The marker positions indicate the mean value of
the 100 trials and the vertical bars are the range of ±σ, with
σ being the standard deviation. The entries with solid vertical
bars are physical experiment results, whereas the entries with
dashed vertical bars represent the corresponding simulation re-
sults. As shown in the ﬁgure, the physical experiment results are
consistent with those of the simulation despite the signiﬁcant
322 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 27, NO. 2, APRIL 2011
Fig. 9. Comparing the EST of the SM and the RW. Note that “Phys.” means
the physical experiment results, while “Simu.” represents simulation results.
The vertical bars correspond to [−σ, σ] with σ as the standard deviation.
Fig. 10. Comparing the EST of different LCRT and ASER conﬁgurations.
difference in sensing region shape. Both results conﬁrmed that
the SM has a shorter EST than that of the RW. Unlike the simu-
lation, we cannot repeat the experiments under a large range of
various parameter settings due to hardware limitations.
In the second setup, we validate Corollary 2 and Lemma 1
by comparing different LCRT and ASER conﬁgurations. The
results are shown in Fig. 10. Again, we follow the same legend
convention of mean and standard deviation, as in Fig. 9. Each
entry indicates the mean value and the standard deviation of
100 trials. The simulation results and the physical experiment
results are consistent. The results conclude that the increasing
order of EST of all conﬁgurations is as follows:
{LCRT-SM, ASER-SM, LCRT-P-RW, LCRT-C-RW,
ASER-RW}
with LCRT-SM being the best and ASER-RW being the worst
searching methods, respectively. This result is consistent with
Corollary 2 and Lemma 1. In addition, the fact that ASER-
SM is faster than LCRT-P-RW and ASER-RW is slower than
LCRT-C-RW is rather interesting and worth further study in the
future.
VII. C ONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
We analytically modeled the EST and SSC for a robot with
a limited sensing range to search for a target that intermittently
emits short duration signals. We presented the closed-form
model for the EST. The EST model is motion-plan indepen-
dent and can be used to analyze different motion plans or robot
conﬁgurations. We demonstrated the analysis process using two
case studies. In the ﬁrst case, we analyzed the SM and the RW
and found that the SM is asymptotically faster than the RW. In
the second case, our analysis revealed the interesting result that
a LCRT is always asymptotically faster than an expensive robot
when the sensory coverage is the same. In both cases, the re-
sults demonstrated the usefulness and the capability of our EST
analysis. Our theoretically results were extensively tested using
simulation and physical experiments. The experimental results
were consistent with the analytical models.
This paper will lead to a rich set of exciting future work. As
an extension, we will analyze cases, where multiple targets are
needed to be searched. We will also develop the EST metrics
for the searching of a moving target, an uncooperating target,
or multiple sensor combinations. Different sensor models will
also be considered. In addition, we also need to consider cases,
where obstacles clutter the searching space.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank E. Frazzoli, E. Frew, J. Xiao,
and R. V olz for their insightful discussions. They would also
like to thank Y . Xu, J. Zhang, A. Aghamohammadi, and W.
Li for their input and contributions to the Networked Robots
Laboratory, Texas A&M University.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Ross, Introduction to Probability Models , 9th ed. ed. New York:
Academic, 2007.
[2] E. Gelenbe, N. Schmajuk, J. Staddon, and J. Reif, “Autonomous search
by robots and animals: A survey,” Robot. Auton. Syst. , vol. 22, no. 1,
pp. 23–34, 1997.
[3] L. Stone Ed., Theory of Optimal Search , 2nd ed. ed. Alexandria, V A:
Military Applications Section, Oper. Res. Soc. Amer., 1989.
[4] K. Trummel and J. Weisinger, “The complexity of the optimal searcher
path problem,” Oper. Res., vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 324–327, Mar./Apr. 1986.
[5] H. Choset, “Coverage for robotics—A survey of recent results,” Ann.
Math. Artif. Intell., vol. 31, no. 1–4, pp. 113–126, Oct. 2001.
[6] S. Martinez, J. Cortes, and F. Bullo, “Motion coordination with distributed
information,” IEEE Control Syst. Mag., vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 75–88, Aug.
2007.
[7] M. Schwager, D. Rus, and J. Slotine, “Decentralized, adaptive control
for coverage with networked robots,” Int. J. Robot. Res. , vol. 28, no. 3,
pp. 357–375, Mar. 2009.
[8] M. Kao, J. Reif, and S. Tate, “Searching in an unknown environment: An
optimal randomized algorithm for the cow-path problem,” Inf. Comput.,
vol. 131, no. 1, pp. 63–79, Nov. 1996.
[9] M. de Berg, M. van Kreveld, M. Overmars, and O. Schwarzkopf, Compu-
tational Geometry, Algorithms and Applications. New York: Springer-
Verlag, 1991.
[10] S. Eidenbenz, C. Stamm, and P. Widmayer, “Inapproximability results for
guarding polygons and terrains,” Algorithmica, vol. 31, no. 1, pp. 79–113,
2001.
[11] F. Preparata and M. Shamos, Computational Geometry: An Introduction.
Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag, 1985.
[12] J. Latombe, Robot Motion Planning. Boston, MA: Kluwer, 1991.
[13] A. Beck and M. Beck, “Son of the linear search problem,” Israel J. Math.,
vol. 48, no. 2–3, pp. 109–122, 1984.
[14] A. L ´opez-Ortiz and S. Schuierer, “Online parallel heuristics and robot
searching under the competitive framework,” in Proc. SWAT , 2002,
pp. 260–269.
[15] R. Baeza-Yates, J. Culberson, and J. Rawlins, “Searching in the plane,”
Inf. Comput., vol. 106, no. 2, pp. 234–252, Oct. 1993.
SONG et al.: ON THE TIME TO SEARCH FOR AN INTERMITTENT SIGNAL SOURCE UNDER A LIMITED SENSING RANGE 323
[16] S. Benkoski, M. Monticino, and J. Weisinger, “A survey of the search
theory literature,” Naval Res. Logistics, vol. 38, no. 4, pp. 469–494, Aug.
1991.
[17] S. Thrun, W. Burgard, and D. Fox, Probabilistic Robotics. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press, 2005.
[18] K. Laventall and J. Cortes, “Coverage control by multi-robot networks
with limited-range anisotropic sensory,” Int. J. Control, vol. 82, no. 6,
pp. 1113–1121, Jun. 2009.
[19] P. Brass, “Bounds on coverage and target detection capabilities for models
of networks of mobile sensors,”ACM Trans. Sens. Netw., vol. 3, no. 2, art.
9, Jun. 2007.
[20] M. Batalin and G. Sukhatme, “The design and analysis of an efﬁcient
local algorithm for coverage and exploration based on sensor network
deployment,” IEEE Trans. Robot. , vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 661–675, Aug.
2007.
[21] D. Fox, J. Ko, K. Konolige, B. Limketkai, D. Schulz, and B. Stewart,
“Distributed multirobot exploration and mapping,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 94,
no. 7, pp. 1325–1339, Jul. 2006.
[22] W. Burgard, M. Moors, C. Stachniss, and F. Schneider, “Collaborative
multi-robot exploration,” IEEE Trans. Robot. , vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 376–
386, Jun. 2005.
[23] D. Song, J. Yi, and Z. Goodwin, “Localization of unknown networked
radio sources using a mobile robot with a directional antenna,” in Proc.
Amer. Control Conf., New York, Jul. 2007, pp. 5952–5957.
[24] D. Song, C. Kim, and J. Yi, “Simultaneous localization of multiple un-
known CSMA-based wireless sensor network nodes using a mobile robot
with a directional antenna,” J. Intell. Serv. Robots, vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 219–
233, Oct. 2009.
[25] D. Song, C. Kim, and J. Yi, “Monte carlo simultaneous localization of
multiple unknown transient radio sources using a mobile robot with a
directional antenna,” inProc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., Kobe, Japan,
May 2009, pp. 3154–3159.
[26] D. Song, C. Kim, and J. Yi, “Stochastic modeling of the expected time
to search for an intermittent signal source under a limited sensing range,”
presented at the Robot.: Sci. Syst. Conf., Zaragoza, Spain, Jun. 2010.
[27] F. Al-Athari, “Estimation of the mean of truncated exponential distribu-
tion,” J. Math. Statist., vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 284–288, 2008.
[28] M. Brummelhuis and H. J. Hilhorst, “How a random walk covers a ﬁnite
lattice,” Physica A: Statist. Mech. Appl. , vol. 185, no. 1–4, pp. 35–44,
Jun. 1992.
[29] S. Condamin, O. B ´enichou, and M. Moreau, “First-passage times for
random walks in bounded domains,” Phys. Rev. Lett. , vol. 95, no. 26,
pp. 260601-1–260601-4, Dec. 2005.
[30] J. D. Noh and H. Rieger, “Random walks on complex networks,” Phys.
Rev. Lett., vol. 92, no. 11, pp. 118701-1–118701-4, Mar. 2004.
[31] S. Condamin, O. Benichou, V . Tejedor, R. V oituriez, and J. Klafter, “First-
passage times in complex scale-invarant media,”Nature, vol. 450, pp. 77–
80, Nov. 2007.
[32] L. Lovasz, “Random walks on graphs: A survey,” in Combinatorics:
Paul Erdos is Eighty. vol. 2, D. Miklos and V . T. Sos, Eds. Budapest,
Hungary: Janos Bolyai Math. Soc., 1993, pp. 1–46.
[33] N. Balakrishnan and A. Cohen, Order Statistics & Inference: Estimation
Methods. New York: Academic, 1991.
[34] C. Rose and M. Smith, “Computational order statistics,” Mathematica J,
vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 790–802, 2005.
Dezhen Song (S’02–M’04–SM’09) received the
B.S. and M.S. degrees from Zhejiang University,
Hangzhou, China, in 1995 and 1998, respectively,
and the Ph.D. degree from the University of Califor-
nia, Berkeley, in 2004.
He is currently an Associate Professor with Texas
A&M University, College Station. His research in-
terests include networked robotics, distributed sens-
ing, computer vision, surveillance, and stochastic
modeling.
Dr. Song was the recipient at the Kayamori Best
Paper Award at the 2005 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Au-
tomation (with J. Yi and S. Ding). He was also the recipient of the National
Science Foundation Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Award in
2007. From 2007 to 2009, he was a Co-Chair of IEEE Robotics and Automa-
tion Society Technical Committee on Networked Robots. He is an Associate
Editor of IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS and the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON
AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING.
Chang-Young Kimreceived the B.S. degree in elec-
trical engineering from Korea University, Seoul, Ko-
rea, in 2005. He is currently working toward the Ph.D.
degree with the Department of Computer Science
and Engineering, Texas A&M University, College
Station.
He was with GIT Co., Ltd, Seoul, where he was en-
gaged in the ﬁelds of automotive and embedded sys-
tems. His current research interests include mobile
robots, networked robots, radio localization, robot
navigation, sensor networks, and surveillance.
Jingang Yi (S’99–M’02–SM’07) received the B.S.
degree in electrical engineering from Zhejiang Uni-
versity, Hangzhou, China, in 1993, the M.Eng. de-
gree in precision instruments from Tsinghua Univer-
sity, Beijing, China, in 1996, and the M.A. degree
in mathematics and the Ph.D. degree in mechanical
engineering from the University of California, Berke-
ley, in 2001 and 2002, respectively.
He is currently an Assistant Professor of mechani-
cal engineering with Rutgers University, Piscataway,
NJ. His research interests include autonomous robotic
systems, dynamic systems and control, and automation science and engineering,
with applications to biomedical systems, civil infrastructural and transportation
systems, and semiconductor manufacturing.
Prof. Yi is the recipient of the 2010 National Science Foundation Fac-
ulty Early Career Development (CAREER) Award. He has coauthored papers
that have received the Kayamori Best Paper Award at the 2005 IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Robotics and Automation. He is currently an Associate
E d i t o ro ft h eASME Dynamic Systems and Control Division and the IEEE
Robotics and Automation Society Conference Editorial Boards. He was also
the Guest Editor for the IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND
ENGINEERING.